Chapter I 


CHEIROGNOMY OR THE SHAPE OF THE HANDS AND 

FINGERS 

Of all the living things on earth man is the most complex; 
and of his limbs the hands are the most wonderful. The hands 
have been able to make the most wonderful machines; but 
he himself could never invent a better and more useful thing 
than his own hand. Close examination of the shape, signs, 
marks and lines on the hand can reveal nature, health and 
mental tendencies and destiny, as has been established by 
modem writers. For the hand is the humble servant of the 
brain, and there is an intimate connection between its centres 
and the hand. 

A great diversity is found in the shapes of hands, which 
have been classified under the following headings: square, 
spatulate, conic, mixed, philosophk:, psychic, and elementary. 
Tliese classes are marked off from one another by the shape of 
the palm and the fingers and the knots on the joints. For 
practical purposes this groupin^^ does not yield reliable conclu- 
sions, as no type is found "pure or "exact'\ At times it is mis- 
leading and likely to confuse students. "Very rarely, if ever," 
says Noel Jacquin, the British palmist, "is there found a subject 
possessing hands that entirely conform to any one of ‘these 
types. Man is a complex animal, often a tangled mass of appa- 
rent contradictions. The hand, therefore, often betrays thitf 
complex combination of varying traits.” 

For the proper divination of character and disposition, 
Cheiromomy is unequalled among occult sciences. The shape 
of the nand and fingers is largely hereditary, but the lines and 
signs on the palm are not transmitted through parents. In 
real life we come across hands that are broad, short, large or 
small, long and narrow, soft and flabby and hard. 

Large hands belong to people who are fond of extremely 
detailed work and are inclined to go into the minutest details 
of business. Tliey have small handwriting, and pay*close atten- 
tion to the mles of etiquette, and are'easilv offended by even 
the slightest lapses of courtesy. 

A broad hand indicates a more balanced type of mind with 
broad vision, commonsense, and love of activity not usually 
encountered in any other t)q>e. 

Small hands belong to people who write a lame hand, 
and are complacent by nature, broadminded and readily satis- 
fied. "They prefer to carry out large ideas,” says Cheiro, “and 
as a rule m^e plans far too large for their power of execu- 



2 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


tion. They love to manage large concerns and govern 
communities/* 

Long and narrow hands characterize “dreamers/* They are 
not thorough-going and practical in their methods. They some- 
times prove to be jacks of all trades and masters of none. It 
has also been observed that thinness and length of the hand 
makes a person self-centred. He feels out ot place, isolated 
from the mass of mankind, is shy and retiring by disposition. 

The possessors of soft hands are generally poetically 
minded, imaginative and highly strung. They are governed 
by their senses. Hence a sort hand is more frequently a 
woman's hand. If it is flabby, the above characteristics are 
mamified to danger point. It then becomes the hand of the 
slomful, the pleasure-lover, the utterly selfish and heartless, 
and naturally, the common thief and traitor. Its possessor has 
a tongue and a brain ever active in evil ways. It is the hand 
of the anarchist. 

Hard-handed people are practical as a rule, lacking strong 
ima^nation. They are frank and open, undemonstrative, 
hard-working, firm and reliable, and remarkably courageous. 

With the passage of time the hands become drier and less 
supple. Hence we have to reckon with the age of the subject 
when, we examine the consistency of the hand. 

An extremely hard hand indicates lack of intelligence, 
brutality, and great indifference to others as well as to one*5 
self. 

The above is a summary of what Western palmists have 
said about the hand in general. I have not described at len^h 
what they teach about its shwe. For information on mis 
-point I can but refer the reader to the standard authors on 
palmistry. 

(il) The Palm 

A thin, hard, skinny and narrow palm connotes timiditv, 
meanness, poor intellect, absence of passive or active energy, 
and a nervous, worrying tou bled nature. 

A very thick palm, full and soft shows sensuality, gross 
sensual instincts, excessive confidence and selfishness. 

A thick palm with hardness of hand and short fingers in- 
dicates a primitive hand. This is the hand of an unskilled 
labourer, who is not expected to improve his lot. If this is 
accompanied by a bad-loaking thumb, it is the hand of a faorutal 
criminal. 

A firm and elastic ymlm is indicative of quickness of in- 
tellect, equanimity of mind and energy. 

. A very hollow palm signifies misfortune. As Cheiro says: 
"Such people have .even more disap^intments than fall as a 
rule to the lot of mortals.** Tliis Imllowness inclines more to 
one line or portion of the hand than to another. If it is in- 



CHEIROCNOMY OR THE SHAPE OF THE HANDS AND FINGERS 3 


dined to the line of life, it foretells domestic troubles. If it . 
leans towards the line of fate, it predicts misfortune in busi- 
ness, money, and worldly afFairs. If inclined towards the line 
of head, some brain trouble is to be feared. When under the 
line of heart, it indicates that there will be disappointment in 
affections. 

y^ccording to Hindu palmists, the aigns of good and praise- 
worthy hands are ten in number, and are as follows: warm 
to touch; coloured like the sky before dawn; if the fingers are 
joined together, without leaving an opening, no light would’ 
pass through; bright hands, as if they are oiled; full and thick; 
medium-sized; copper-coloured nails; long-fingered; wide; no 
sweat, i.e., always dry. 

The hands of a rich man have long fingers and good-looking 

S alms. If the hands of a woman appear as charming as a lotus- 
ower, she is fortunate, and will lead a happy life. Women 
with thin, skinny hands with protruding veins, with a network 
of wrinkles, lines and signs are not destined to be happy. 

According to Hindu palmists, a palm which is evenly ba- 
lanced, with round hollows, presages wealth. A raised, full 
palm shows that the subject is charitable. A clearly hollow 
palm means that the person will lose his patrimony. A palm 
with a distinct hollow is a sign of poverty. Varahamihira says 
that such a palm betrays a tendency to be hard-hearted and 
pitiless. 

When the mounts on a hand are normally developed, it is 
not possible for a palm to have hollows. The truth is that a 
palm which is evenly balanced is likely to have a round type 
of hollow; and this is regarded as a favourable sign. Benham 
supports this view in Laws of Scientific Hand-reading. The. 
centre of the palm is called the Plain of Mars. When tl^ area 
is unusually hollow, a person lacks drive, dash and push. He 
is of an easy-going disposition, and in worldly struggles he is 
easily discouraged. The Indian palmists regard the hollow as 
a mark of indigence. A heavily lined palm simifies misery and 
troubles in life, sometimes a snort life. If there are very few 
lines (see the hands of unskilled labourers), this is a sign of 
poverty. 

(Ill) Colour of the Palm 

A red or pink-coldured palm is a sign of fortune. If the 
colour is yellow, the subject is inclined to sexual irregularities, 
illidt generally. A yellow ralm poinj^ to a bilious condlition, 
which is the cause of irritability. W^ife and black palms in- 
dicate poverty. Blue signifies tne habitual use of intoxicants. 



Chapter II 


FINGERS 

{a) Long Fingers and Their Indications, Fingers are 
either long or short. Long-fingered persons are mostly found 
in the upper strata of society and engaged in intellectual call- 
ings, sncn as law, surgery, accountancy, electrical engineering, 
etc. They love detail and accuracy even in trivial affairs. They 
are apt to worry over trifles, and are easily ruffled by adverse 
circumstances. If the liand is bad, the person is deceitful and 










FINGERS 


5 


cowardly. Long fiiigers signify sensitiveness and culture. They^ 
are prevalent in members of professions requiring brainwork/ 
but not in those earning their livelihood by means of handi- 
crafts. If the fingers are very long, they show virtues and vices 
of an extreme character. 



MAP OF THE HAND ACCORDING TO HINDU •SCHOOL 

. (b) Short Fingers. Short fingered persons are quick to 
act, quick to grasp essential points and possess quick minds. 
They are organizers; but, unless aided ^ long-mgered per- 
sons, they are apt to overlook details. Iney take things for 
panted, and do not look kt matters closely. They are hasty 
in their manner and assart their rights in a blufiF, down-right 
manner. Short fingers ha!Ve been conside]^ as sigjas of a lack 
of culture and good breeding, and generally occur in families 








6 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


^engaged in handicrafts. Thick and short fingers indicate selfish- 
ness and sometimes cruelty, if found on the hands of others 
than labourers. 

(c) Knotty Fingers. For an accurate reading the actual 
fomiation of the fingers should be carefully examined. Tliere 
are two recognizable types: knotted and smooth. People with 
knotty fingers are tliroughout and have analytical minds. The 
main points to study in fingers with knots are: symmetry, order 
and punctuality. Tliese characteristics combine to make a suc- 
cessful, clever mechanic, architect, devoted and conscientious 
scientist, and a just judge, who is not likely to be swayed by 
his emotions. It is regarded as a sign of commonsense. If the 
fingers are heavily knotted, they make a person unimaginative, 

"liicapable of appreciating the beauties of poetry, art, music, 
and literature. Such fingers are found in businessmen, absorbed 
in their affairs, with their higher impulses dulled and blunted. 
Tliese characteristics are enhanced, if the fingers are long and 
knotted. Knots on short fingers tend to control their quickness 
and impulses, and render them rational and amenable to rea- 
son. TTie fingers have sometimes only one joint developed 
or knotted. The first joint is one that indicates order in ideas; 
'ihe second knot, order in material things; the third, order in 
domestic matters. Each knot has a significance of its own, 
so that the fingers with the first knot developed are those of a 
philosopher, possessing abundant intellectual power. This is 
the sign of an author. If the second knot is duly developed, 
we have the hands of a person who uses his mind to evolve 
systems. This is present in the hands of merchants, book- 
keepers, farmers, mechanics, and school-masters of the ordi- 
nary type. The characteristics of finger knots should be read 
together with other characteristics like the variety in tips of 
the first phalange, etc. 

(d) Smooth Fingers. While knots in fingers denote 
powers of reflection and orderly ideas and actions, smooth 
fingers are found on the hands of persons who are impulsive, 
unsuccessful, hasty, thoughtless and ignorant of real facts. Their 
first thought is generally the right one. Their guesses may be 
correct, but they meet with failure if they start reasoning. Note 
that any isolated observation will always be valueless whenever 
an exact coi^clusion is required. Therefore attention is drawn 
to the many relationships that exist between these types of 
fingers and this or that, line or sign. 

I do not propose to describe in detail all the aspects of 
Cheirognomy treated by certain standard writers. In this connec- 
tion 1 would recommend Benhain*s Laws of Scientific Hand- 
reading. 

Fingers, classified according to the tips, are of four kinds: 
Minted, conical, squ&re, spatulate. Very rarely have all the 
fingers been found to have the same kind of tips. In such a case. 



FINGERS 


7 


the rules applying to each type should be borne in mind while^ 
forming an estimate of the nature of a person^s character. 

{e) Pointed Fingers, The rarest and finest hand of all is 
the hand with pointed or psychic fingers, a well-shaped thumb, 
and flexible fingers. Poirvted fingers refer to hands of people 
belonging to the ornamental rather than to the useful section 
of society. They are poets, dreamerJ^ and philosophers who 
dream wonderful dreams of social regeneration, but are devoid 
of the ability to do anything constructive. They find themselves 
in this world, but do not feel themselves of this world. Such 
fingers must have been those of rabid fanatics, early Cliristian 
martyrs, monks, and mediaeval idealists and visionaries. Pointed 
fingers connote intense self-absorption and renunciation. In India 
Avatars like Lord Krishna have been shown as possessing long, 
smooth-pointed fingers. If these signs are exaggerated, they are 
unfavourable and mring misfortune. There is alack of practical 
application. For a poor man to marry a woman with pointed 
fingers would spell certain disaster. His household would be 
neglected, and his children unattended. 





Q 


s 







A 


1 

B 

C 

y 

1 

D 


Fic. 3. 

A. Finger with square tip and smooth joint. 

B. Pointed tip and smooth joint. 

C. Spatulate tip with knots. 

D. Waist-like thumb. 

• 

(/) Conic Fingers, Here the fingers instead of mdually 
coming to a point without knots, from the first to the third 
phcalange, keep even in thickness up to the third and then assume 
a semi-pointed cone or tip. They are thicker than the pointed 
fingers, and so is the palm that accompanies them. These per- 
sons, with conical fingers, will be driven by impulse and insect 
more than by reason, and the degree of stren^ as indicated 
by the thumb will make Aem industrious hr omerwise. To this 
class of hands belong all those restless people who cannot remain 
in one place or job for a long time. They are (rf excitable tern* 



8 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


.peranients, sensitive, lovable, but inconstant in their affections. 
If conical fingers are found on the hands of a woman, the hand, 
according to St. Germain is one that is “pai*-excellence”. The 
owners of such fingers and hands are attracted by all beautiful 
things in art and nature. But he or she, as the case may be, 
is a plaything of moods, and this fitfulness is the cause of failure 
in married life. If the fr.igers are unusually conical and the 
hand bad on the whole, lethargy, sensuality and incapacity to 
concentrate are indicated. This makes for an unbalanced, futile 
life. On the hands of rogues, thieves, vagabonds, crooks, the 
fingers arc conical with the little finger of Mercury extremely 
long and dominant. Such persons have never been known to be 
straightforward, honest characters, 

(g) Square Tips. People with square finger-tips have their 
first phalange square, not only on its upper face, but on all four 
sides. The palm with the characteristic square tips is of medium 
thickness and slightly hollow and firm. The thumb is large and 
well-formed, and the first knot is also in evidence. Marked 
characteristics of this hand are regularity, order, perseverance, 
and foresight. It is the hand of a thorough businessman, more 
practical than thoughtful, the? hand of a mechanical, practical 
person strictly adhering to usage and laws ruled by reason ra- 
ther than by emotion, and of a truthful disposition. He is not 
prepared to sacrifice respectability, is generous, but knows where 
to place his charity. In .short, square-fingered hands are the 
sign of clever, capable persons, who succeed. If the fingers are 
knotted, they incline to study and reason. Tip joints, if deve- 
loped, will incline one to organization, invention and, in case 
of absence of development of the lower joint, they may not be 
able to complete their inventions. Square tips also predict pro- 
ficiency in sport. 

(h) Spatulate Tips. Spatulate fingers are found on the 
hands of persons who are energetic ana active. They are com- 
mon in the U.S.A. and Great Britain. Possessors of such hands 
are dynamic, self-confident and lovers of outdoor life. Such 
hands indicate a tendency to indulge in mechanical crafts and 
agriculture as well. 

Ancient feudal lords and warriors had this type of fingers. 
Christian reformers and modern “progressives” and reactionaries 
are cliaracterized by such “finger-tips. 

(t) Mixed Types, lii actual life, it is veiy rare to find any- 
one on whose hands the fingers are uniformly of one type. Most 
hands are made up of mixed types. The most usual combina- 
tion is that where the first and fourth fingers are pointed or 
conic and the third and second square or spatulate. Such peo- 
ple will have some o^ tlie characteristics belonging to each type. 
The palmist consequently has to discriminate when reading a 
hand by examining closely each finger-tip. 



FINGERS 


'"^^ere are able artists on whose hands a well-developed. 
Mount of Venus, with conical or pointed first and fourth, and 
spatulate second and third fingers have been observed. The 
pointed or conic type indicates artistic vision, love of colour, a 
good ear for music, or the feeling for rhythm. If the little finger 
is pointed or conical, the possessor has the ability to make im- 
pressive speeches. The presence of sc}uare or spatulate tips on 
the second and third fingers gives its possessor the ability to 
realize his ideals and instincts. Short fingers, relative to the palm 
and nails, makes a person a capable organizer, one who will not 
rest until he has finished a job thoroughlv. People with such 
signs have been found to be severe taskmasters, especially if 
the line of head is straight and turns up towards the Mount 
of Mercury at the end. 

If the hands are heavily knotted and have pointed fingers, 
the possessors incline to be of a grasping nature. They are dis- 
posed to be wasteful, as far as their own self is concerned, but 
in case of their fellows, they are niggardly. Their house-mem- 
bers are shabbily treated. These people are also extremely self- 
centred. 

Composers of music have the &st and fourth fingers pointed, 
and the second and third fingers spatulated. The first joint 
’should be developed, and the Mount of Venus prominent. Hands 
v/ith spatulated and knotted fingers are inclined to be of a mecha- 
nical, inventive turn of mind. People with pointed first and 
fourth fingers and square second and third are likely to be poets, 
provided smoothness of the fingers is evident. 

Authors have their top joints developed irrespective of the 
shape of the hands and fingers. 

Ihe presence of pads on the inner portion of the finger ’ 
tips are definite signs of a nature which is sensitively alive to 
aft that is beautiful and harmonious. If this sign is very pro- 
minent, a sort of personal attraction or mesmeric power is 
indicated. 

The pads referred to just now, if found on the hands of a 
doctor, nurse, or veterinary surgeon, are invaluable. Hence, it 
has been seen that with these marks a firm hand, short fingers, 
and a slightly curved little finger a clever surgeon or vet is 
predicted. If theie are transverse lines on the inner portion 
of the second phalange of the thumb, there is pre.sent a strong 
power of attraction. 

It is important for the student lt>^note which finger domi- 
nates in a hand, as well as the dominant phalange in that 
finger, as each finger has three phalanges. ,The degree of 
stren^h or otherwise of the finger should be judged by the 
strengtli or weakness of the mount situated below it; for, if it 
is overlooked, a correct judgment of the nature and character 
of the possessor of die hand will not be po.isible. For example : 
if, on the hand, the first finger, f.e., the finger of Jupiter, is 
unusually long with a strong and developed Jupiter mount as 



10 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


^ compared with other fingers, we should conclude that the finger 
*in question is the dominant one, and the subject would be a 
Jupiterian in temper, nature and character. In such cases, the 
finger is either nearly equal to the second or larger than the 
third one. Having decided this point, one should next com- 
pare the length of the dominant fiiiger with the others, and 
note the abnormal development of length of the phalanges of 
other fingers as well. He may then conclude in what way the 
dominant characteristics are modified by these signs. It must 
be borne in mind that cuinparative thickness, width, flatness 
and length of phalanges should be noted, considered and 
judged. An unusual thickness of a phalange is equivalent to 
an uncommon length, but refers to greater strength of character 
and will-power. A finger divided into three phalanges is read 
thus; the first (nailed) denotes idealistic or mental tendencies; 
the middle one, the reasoning and business capacity; and the 
third, material or animal characteristics. 

The Jupiter Finger and Its Phalanges, The first or index 
finger is known as the finger of Jupiter. This denotes by its 
length, width and development the degree of personal pride 
and self-respect that is possessed. If it is longer or equal to the 
second, this is a sign of an 'unusually ambitious person who 
desires to rule and dominate the worm. This was a mark pre- 
sent on Napoleon s hand. If it is long, it indicates a tendency 
to rule, and is generally present in the hands of statesmen and 
clergymen. If tne hand is bad in other respects, it means great 
vanity. If the finger is long, with a pointed tip, there is present 
religious exaltation and superstition. If of the usual length, 
but with a smiare tip, there is a tendency towards a constant 
• qiiest for truth; but, if the tip is spatulated, then the person 
will be attracted to new creeds. If the first phalange is long, 
then a person has the intuitive faculty. If the second is long, 
it indicates ambition and love of domination. If the third is 
long, an autocratic, tyrannical spirit is indicated. 

If the first phalange of the index finger is short in propor- 
tion to the first phalange of the other fingers, it signifies that 
the individual is naturally disposed to disregard religious duties 
and obligations, and has a poor opinion of them. The reason- 
able and the natural side will appeal to him first, and he is 
not likely to be swept away by religious impulses, except under 
uncommon circumstances. A long first phalange can alone give 
that sense and strength ol^ religious fervour which impels one 
to surmount me;in and worldly circumstances. 

A well-proportioned first phalange of Jupiter, if pointed 
and combined with a clear, well-marKed line of head, endows 
a person with a talent for lan^ages and a desire and ability 
to acquire foreign languages with the greatest of ease. A very 
pointed first plialangewndicates superstition and mysticism, and 
is met with in India* among the Vafshnava devotees of Shri 
Krishna. It is curious to note that the hands of racing men. 



FINGERS 


11 


who have faith in lucky or unlucky omens, have this mark in 
a prcxninent form. 

A comparatively long and large second phalange of the 
finger of Tupiter coupled with a strong thumb and no adverse 
sign on the hand to contradict it will enable its possessor to 
attain that status which he has always been coveting. Tl.e 
Mount of Jupiter under this finger is* the mount indicative ol 
sociability, position, ambition, love of power, religion, and love 
of nature. 

When the third phalange of the finger dominates and is 
coupled with a high mount of Jupiter, the subject will be ex- 
cessively haughty. If the first phalange is also large, it indi- 
cates the reli^ous intolerance of the Inquisitors, Bloody Mary 
and Aurangzw. 

The Saturn Finger. The second finger is called the finger 
of Saturn and denotes the degree of reasoning ability, intelli- 
gence, and seriousness of the subject. It is called the &ger of 
balance. If it is long and twisted, murderous instincts are in- 
dicated. It is rarely long and pointed. If it were so, the 
person would be selfish. Generally, the tip of this finger has 
been found squarish or spatulated- This indicates love of ani- 
.mals, and understanding of art, literature, and music. If the 
first plialange is long, a person is inclined to be sad and super- 
stitious, and may sometimes have a tendency to commit suicide. 
This sign, coupled with a long first phalange of the fiirst finger, 
denotes a nature having a firm belief in the doctrine of pre- 
destination, and may go to produce a noble type willing to 
sacrifice his all for the sake of a lost cause. 

On the other hand, if this phalange is short, it indicates . 
a septij with regard to the supernatural, and one who is not 
carried away by religious emotion. He will have a longing 
to chng to life, and is not anxious to spoil his chances of 
improving his lot, even if this can be done at the cost of others. 
Religious considerations will occupy a secondary place with 
him, when his own personal comfort and pleasure are 
concerned. 

The second phalange of Saturn, if comparatively long, de- 
notes a love of agriculture and mechanical occupations, and 
also a fondness for outdoor life. Fanners, gardeners, game- 
keepers, land agents, mechanics, will have this phalathge strongly 
developed. Saturn rules the earth, and all that is in it. Miners 
belong to the Saturnian trae, and generally h^ve this second 
phalange powerfully developed. 

A person whose dominant phalange is th& third one is of 
the earth, earthy. Unless he possesses a good finger of Jupiter 
and other favourable signs on the palm, he will never 'be 
able to be better than a mere clod of earth. 

The Fingjer of Apollo, or the Ring Finger. The finger of 
Apollo is very important and useful in gauging the tempera* 



12 


INDIAN PALMISTBY 


.nrient, abilities and inclinations of a subject. Apollo rules art. 
music, painting, sculpture, literature, public life, and dramatic 
talens of a high order. But we shsdl be mistaken if we were 
to wholly rely on the Apollo finger to find out whether the sub- 
ject can be a successful actor, painter, or musician, as many 
other factors have to be examined "closely. This ^ger indi- 
cates the artistic flair, a desire for wealth and honour, and 
sometimes a vain love of ostentation in dress, jewellery, or 
riches. When it is unusually long, reaching nearly to the nail 
of the second finger, and sometimes equalling it in length, a 
certain amount of rashness and gambling tendency are signi- 
fied. The subject is apt to indulge in speculation. If pos- 
sessed of a weak will, he will risk everything, even life, for the 
sake of chance. 

If this finger is pointed at the tip when other fingers are 
not of this type, the person is frivolous. If it is square at the 
tip, the person will pursue art for the sake of the money he 
can make out of it. If spatulated, a certain dramatic talent 
of a high order is indicated. 

If me first phalange is long, the person has artistic inspira- 
tion. If the second is prominent and long, he is industrious. 
With a long and broad third phalange, one is very likely to turn 
artistic talent to money. Such a person is vain and given to 
ostentation. 

If the finger is as long as the first, the person is moved 
by an intense passion for fame and wealth. 

When the third finger is dominant, he is a true Apollonian, 
ruled by a sunny nature. If the finger is as long as the second, 
optimism will characterize the subject, impelling him to diverse 
kinds of speculation. But signs and marks of strong will and 
wary disposition, if present will keep him from becoming a 
foolliardy gambler. Examine the thumb and the lines of head 
and heart for these signs. 

The Finger of Mercury, The fourth finger is the finger 
of management, and imparts strength to utilize abilities indi- 
cated by the head line. No person ever rose to distinction 
without a long Mercury finger. With it, even a fool would 
achieve success. That is why ancient Indian sages remarked 
that if the little finger rises above the first joint of the Apollo 
finger, it is ,a mark of good fortime. 

T!ie temperament c^p be found out ^ noting the forma- 
tion and shape of the Mercury finger. Tne longer the little 
finger, the longer the subject takes to forgive and forget. A 
short finger of Mercury indicates a short temper; but such a 
person is apt to forget quickly the cause of offence. 

^ A subject with a long first phalange of the little finger 
has generally the gift of fluent speech ana the power of swaying 
his audience. If th^ tip is pointed, }ie will have a keen sense 
of the ridiculous, and will possess a power of mimicry. If the 
fingers are supple, the line of head clear and deep, and die 



FINGERS 


13 


first knot of the long little finger is well-developed and long,^ 
it signifies perseverance, industry, and commerci^ ability. This* 
sign is present on the hands of successful businessmen and 
merchants, 

A long third phalange is the sign of shrewdness. On a bad 
hand cunning and untrutHfulness are indicated. If the line of 
head slopes to the mount of the Moon, it denotes a dishonest, 
untruthful, cunning and deceitful nature. 

If the little finger is nearly as long as the third, it is the 
mark of a savant and philosopher. But, if the hand is bad, 
a deceiver and cheat are indicated. Although rarely found, if 
the little finger is as long as the second, this is indicative of the 
fact that the subject possesses immense powers of self-denial 
and sacrifice, enabling him to overcome all obstacles. 

A curved little finger has been found in the hands of hospi- 
tal nurses, and means that she is suited by nature for the 
profession of her choice. 

If the finger of Mercury is set low on the hand, it is a sure 
sign that the person will have to struggle against monetary cir- 
cumstances all his life. This is a certain indication of lack of 
push and dash in the subject. If ‘coupled with absence of self- 
•confidence, shown by the head h'ne and weakness of will by the 
thumb, it presents a huge stumbling block to a successful career. 
But, if strength of will and self-confidence are in evidence, it is 
a magnificent mark; for it assures that the person is unselfish 
and gives him a nature that would scorn to use people and cir- 
cumstances for his own personal advantage. This mark is 
present on tlie hands of humanitarians and saints rather than on 

1- j.1-^ i -^1 




Fingers on a Line, In certain hands you will find the palm 
arched at the top. This should not be regarded as an unfavour- 
able sign, as it is encountered within a certain land of thin, 
long-fingered hand. The bad or unfavourable sign is when the 
slope is all on one side. When the fingers of Mercury or Apollo 
are set much lower than the other two, there is not much power 
and capacity for carrying out one's idea^. There is always a 
hard struggle, even when a clear head line is found. But, if, on 
the other hand, the slope is reversed, the subject will be in- 
capable of fair dealing and unable to realize high ideals despite 
the presence of an excellent heart line^and the mount of Jupiter 
On the hand of great persons, the fingers have been found set 
on a hne, and this gives an evenly balanced natiire and capacity 
to deal with affairs of life in a successful manner. 

Some More Important Observations Regarding Fingers, For 
the benefit of the student it should be pointed out that .the 
fingers should be straight to express ability and capability indi- 
cated by the lines and mounts of the hand. A twnst of the 
fingers should be distinguished from straightness; the effect of 
illness should also be studied. It should be clearly borne in 


14 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


, mind that fingers to be good should be flat or squared, rather 
than broad on the inside and round like a candle. All the three 
phalanges should be examined and differences in shape and 
formation observed. For people with candle-like fihgers are 
devoid of capacity because of impressionability, self-deception, 
and disorderuness of mind and nature. 



1. Wide space between the base of fingers and the Line of 
Heart indicates general talents. 

2. Fingers evenly set on the pahn. 

The fingers should always be more noticeable than the 
palm of the hand. They should be long and large in proportion. 
If this is the case, the character is more influenced by ability 
rather than by emotions and ideals. The result is that excellent 
acts would follow, and there would be no chance of their being 
only dreamed of and never realized. 

If the fingers turn up at the tips, they indicate avarice and 
tenacity. If they turn badF, the person is tenacious also. If they 
curl up towards* the palm; it means that he is grasping by nature, 
not oiuy as far as^ money is concerned, but also in other matters. 

Larger upper phalanges of the fingers denote constructive 
ability. Tliis is a sign found on the hands of clever carpenters, 
dressmakers, tailors, sculptors, etc. 

Hollowed lower phalanges of the Angers are symptomatic of 
shyness. This will vary in Qie two hands according to whether 
the subject has mastered it or not. 



FINGERS 


15 


Thick lower phalanges indicate greed and love of eating. , 
If thick and wide, a heavy eater is foreshadowed. Good cooks 
can always be detected by the thickness of the lower phalanges. 

If, on opening the palm uppermost, with the fingers held 
close together, small spaces are observed at the base of the third 
phalanges, they are sims Which show that a person is capable 
of living on poor anof hard fare, if necessary. To this class 
belong explorers, mountaineers, and big game hunters. 

Space between the Fingers, When the hand is thrown open 
natur^y, palm uppermost, if there is a large space between 
thumb ana the first finger, a person is large-hearted; between 
the first and second fingers, an independent thinker; between the 
second and third, original and eccentric; between the third and 
fourth, independent in action and self-reliant. 

Observations by Ancient Hindu Writers. According to an- 
cient Hindu writers, there are four fingers and one thumb, and, 
if their number is more, this is considered an unfavourable sign, 
denoting poverty, troubles, and short life (in some cases). 

Fourteen types of fingers with their indications are des- 
cribed. Straight fingers indicate a fortunate person. Strai^t 
and long indicate long life. Thick and round indicate poverty. 
Fingers bent outwards indicate soldiers. Short and flat fingers 
indicate servants and labourers. Dry fingers indicate poverty 
and are unfavourable and bad. Fingers with hair on the back, 
unevenly made fingers, crooked fingers, very short fingers, very 
thin fingers, fingers spread wide apart are indicative of poverty. 
Fingers on the nands of a woman, if crooked, are considered a 
sign of childlessness and widowhood. 

A Few More Observations Regarding Individual Fingers: 

If the Mercury finger touches the upper or nailed joint of the. 
third finger, the subject will rise above the other members of his 
family, and by dint of his own ability wow wealthy. Sometimes 
there are gaps between the fingers, wlien they are held close 
together. The absence of these gaps is a mark that the subject 
will be wealthy; but their presence indicates that the person 
will remain poor. If there are gaps betw een the third and fourth 
fingers, he w'ill be successful in middle life. If between the 
second and first, he will be comfortable in youth. If the fingers 
are entirely closed, it is a mark of wealth. 

Hindu teachers have described very clearly sigm found on 
the toes of men and women. 

Small Toes on the Feet of Men. Xl the first small toe next 
to the big toe is long, square and more beautiful than the latter, 
the man enjoys a good life. If it is short, there is trouble. If it 
is equal in length, it is neither good nor bad. M the second toe 
is longer thsm the &st toe, then the man is apt to lose his wtfe. 
If it is equal to the first, it is a sim of luck. If the third toe' is 
long, then he is given to study. If it is shorter than the second, 
he is an adulterer. If the* first is thick and the fourth long, he 
is happy and wealthy. If the fourth is short, thick and wide 



16 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


like a rod, the man is likely to lose his parents in boyhood. If 
the second is abpormally long, the man is not honoured and his 
work unappreciated. Ir the toes are short and widely spaced, 
the person is a domestic servant. If they are equal in length 
and placed together, they are looked upon as good. Indications 
of the toes resemble in some measure those of the fingers of 
the hand. 

Toes of Women. If the toes of women are soft, round, 
fairly raised, and closely set together, they are looked upon as 
good. If very thin, the indications are unfavourable. It short, 
she will be short-lived. If the toes are crooked and broken, the 
woman is of a deceiving nature. If flat, then she is a servant; 
if wide apart, she v^ill kill many masters and so to another. If, 
when a woman walks, a cloud of dust is raised in consequence, 
she will ruin three families. If the first toe of a woman is longer 
than the big toe, she is self-willed, licentious, and will never oe 
able to live happily with her husband and sooner or later will 
leave him. If tne second toe is longer than the big toe, the 
woman is unusually unfortunate, and source of worry to others. 
One should not marry such a woman. If the third toe of a 
woman is short, she is inclined to be quarrelsome; when this toe 
does not touch the ground while walking, she loses or kills two 
husbands and goes in for a third. When the fourth toe does not 
touch the ground while walking, a woman becomes a widow 
and remarries. If the second toe does not touch the earth while 
walking, after losing three husbands she will marry a fourth. If 
the third and fourth are short, the woman will have no husband 
at all. 



CHAPTER m 


FINGER NAILS 

St. Germain, the well-known Frehch palmist, says: “The 
modem physician, be he allopath, homeopath, or eclectic, has 
long ago admitted that the colour, consistency, and heat of the 
palm, as well as the form and thickness of the nail, are elements 
he cannot afford to neglect when forming a diagnosis of any 
patient's state of health. Besides, nails throw a flood of light 
on the temper possessed by a person. It goes without saying 
that a good temper is the most important mature in a person's 
character. This may refer to four factors : anger, cheen ulness, 
self-confidence and vindictiveness. While discussing nails, we 
shall see what has been learnt about these characteristics from 
an examination of the nails. 

Nails and Health, As far as the science of cheiromomy is 
concerned, the - size of the nail can be judged as extenmng from 
its beginning to the tip of the finger. Nails may be classified as 
long, short, broad and narrow. 

Long Nails, Long nails denote weak physical nature. People 
with long nails are likely to suffer from chest and lung troubles, 
especially if die nails are thin, curved, or, worse still, fluted or 
ribbed. 

Long, fhick and curved nails are a sign of cruel nature and 
loose morals. 

When this kind of nail is shorter, it is indicative of throat 
troubles, such as laryngitis, asthma and bronchial troubles. 

Long nails, white at the top, and bluish in colour indicate 
faulty circulation as a result of ill health or nervous weakness. 
Such sign will appear on the hands of women when between the 
ages of fourteen and twenty-one, forty-two and forty-seven. 

Short Nails. Short nails indicate a tendency to heart dis- 
ease. Short, thin and flat at the base with little or no moons, 
they are infallible signs of weak action of the heart. Large 
moons, if present, indicate good circulation. Short and triangular- 
shaped nails, besides being flat and thin, denote a -tendency to 
paralysis. 

'^"fhort nails, flat and inclined to cuiye out at, the edges, also 
foretell paralysis. 

Nails with spots denote a highly-strung nervous tempera- 
ment. White spots are a sign of general delicacy. Thin nails 
of small size show lack of energy and ill health. If narrow and 
long with airves, spinal trouble is imminen^. 

Nails to be perfect sliould be transparent, pink, polished, 
not brittle, and of normal length. The possessor is a person of 



IS 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


good spirits, refinement, healthy, natural tastes, and plenty of 
tact. 

When a deep furrow is found across the nail, it is a mark 
that a severe illness has impaired the nervous system. Tlie date 
and time of this illness and strain can be found as follows: if 
found at the base, one month; if seen about the centre, four to 
five months; if on the edge or outer edge, nine months. Fluted 
nails indicate a weakness of the nervous system. 

Marks on the Nails. Black spots show grief, sorrow, and 
sadness. A starshaped white mark shows a useless worship of 
things and people, unrequited love, or deception. A white mark 
on the thumb nail shows attachment. A black spot denotes 
crime. A white spot on the nail of the Jupiter finger shows 
gain, and a black spot denotes loss. A white spot on the nail 
of the middle finger foretells a joumev, and a black spot denotes 
impending ruin. A white spot on the nail of the third finger 
indicates honour and wealth, but a black spot dishonour. A 
white spot on the nail of the fourth finger indicates success in 
science and business ventures; but a bla^ spot indicates failure. 
If one has yellow marks on the nails, this is taken as a sign 
of premature death. 

'^ Disposition and Nails. Longnailed people are less critical 
and more impressionable than those with short nails. Ihey have 
a more equaole tem^r, and a rentier diroosition. They have 
more resignation, idealism and a taste for literature, poetry, 
painting, and the fine arts. They are inclined to be visionaries. 

Short-nailed persons, on the other hand, are critical, and are 
apt to analyse everything they come across. They are lo^al- i 
minded, and rely on facts. Their brain is more active. They^; 
are good debaters, and have a livelier sense of humour than 
those with long nails. Their temper is, however, quick and 
sharp. When the nails are broaJei than they are long, they 
indicate a quarrelsome nature, tending to meddle in other 
people's affairs. 

If a person bites his nails habitually, he is of a nervous and 
worrying temperament. 

Nails and Temper. Self-control and cheerfulness can be 
read from the mounts. 

Anger as Indicated by Nails. Anger, flaring up from pa.s- 
sion, is shov.Ti by the size and shape of the nans. The wider 
and shorter the nails, the more anger is felt; the longer and 
larger Ae nails, the less a^iger is felt. 

The colour of the nails denotes that anger which is derived 
from Ae nerves. The pinker Ae nails, Ae more; Ae whiter, Ae 
less. This can be improved, if cured, as it is the result of bad 
digestion or nerves, A good colour indicates health. 

Cheerfulness. If .Ae mount of Mercury is prominent, it gives 
a person cheerfulne&s and hope. He does not easily become 
discouraged and despondent This should be read in oonjunev 
tion wiA Ae characteristics of Ae nails. 



FINGER NAILS 


19 


Self-control, The upper mount of Mars under Mercury^ 
situated between the lines of Heart and Head, if well-developra 
and flat, endows its possessor with self-control and a spirit of 
resignation and resistance of evil. The student is advised to 
examine this part of the hand to estimate the degree of self- 
controL It may be statc^d that die harder and higher die 
mount,' diej^ater the control of temmr; the longer and softer, 
the less. Tne phalanges of the thunm and dieir shape should 
also be examined. 

Vindictiveness, Long-nailed people are quiet-tempered. 
They require much provocation to rouse them to passion; and, if 
they are, their feelings generally find expression in sarcasm or 
quiet revenge. 


CHAPTER IV 


THE THUMB AND ITS SECRETS 

f 

The Chinese and Hindus have always been believers in the 
astrological aspect of hand-reading. The Chinese liave a system 
of reading and divination by a study of the impression left by 
the ball of the thumb pressed on a lump of soft wax. No two 
thumbs are absolutely alike and, in the same way, no two hands 
can l)c found whose shape and lines are identical. ‘'The higher 
animal,” says D’Arpentigny, “is revealed in the hand, but the 
man is in tne thumb.” 

The importance of the thumb in relation to the science of 
hand-reading has l:)een accepted on all hands. A thumb may be 
of any one of the following varieties: stiflF, or firm-jointed; 
flexible or supple; composite; small; large; low-set; high set. 
These are types classified according to shape. A further classifi- 
cation is also possible when the first two phalanges and their 
shape are considered. 

Stiff thumb. There arepeople who possess a thumb, which 
bends back only slightly. This connotes strong will, caution and 
wariness, secretiveness, steadiness and slow advance towards the 
objective. The possessor of such a type has rich commonsense 
and self-control. In war he is strong and irresistible; in love, 
firm and do^ed, but not given to display. If the thumb is 
extremely stiff and will not bend back at all, a grasping and 
avaricious nature is denoted. 

Supple thumb. This bends back easily and shows extrava- 
gance in everything, money matters, ideas, plans and adaptability 
to all circumstances. Tiie possessor cf such a thumb is a bom 
spendthrift, quite at home in every kind of social setting. 

Composite type. This is a combination of the preceding 
two. The top joint is rather thick, showing will-power and 
determination. It bends back a bit. These people can be reso- 
lute as well as impulsive. They are likely to feel awkward some- 
times, as they are “impulsively determined” (Jaquin). 

Small thumb. A thumb may be small, denoting weak cha- 
racter and <smotion, lack of drive and determination. The pos- 
sessor is guided by his heart and sentiments, and is easily 
influenced. He is romantic and is passionately fond of fiction. 
He ;ippreciate!s the beahtiful and sentimental. The thumb of 
the French king, Louis XVI, belonged to this type; it will be 
recalled that be was beheaded in the Revolution. 

• Large thumb. These have been found on the hands of men 
of oi.tstanding character, who were ruled by the head rather 
than the heart. Cotitt St. Germain says that Galileo, Descartes, 
Ne\^’ton, Leibnitz ana Voltaire had large thumbs. The thumbs 
of Napoleon and Gladstone were large. 



THE THUMB AND ITS SECRETS 


21 


Low-set thumb. This is one with a wide gap from the base 
of the Jupiter finger to die inner root of the 'thumb. It denotes 
great general talent and adaptability. But it is not usual for 
such a subject to possess great literary powers. He has the 
^tJ^acity to adapt the boojcs of others to his own requirements. 
He is an ideal compiler. When a low-set thumb leaves a large 
space between its^ and the finger* of Jupiter, it denotes a 
nature abounding in humane qualities, such as generosity, inde- 
pendent thought, love of liberty for all, sympathy for all. Thus 
the low-set thumb is a "philanthropic”, humane thumb. It is 
generally long and large; and, if it is so, it indicates great 
qualities associated with eminent, strong character. It is rare. 

High-set thumb, A monkey s thumb is placed high at the 
side of the paw; also the thumb of an idiot. Thus we reason 
that the higher the thumb is placed on the side of the hand, the 
lower the grade of intelligence and the less the adaptability of 
the subject. The smaller the thumb and the nearer it approaches 
to the monkey thumb, the nearer the approach of the subject to 
the qualities of the monkey. Monkeys may be bright and 
shrewd, but wholly lack "character” (Benham). Mrs. Robinson 
in The Graven Palm says that hi^h-set thumbs have as a rule 
been found on the hands of novelists, journalists, and writers. In 
my opinion, high-set thumbs must have been extremely large 
and well-shaped, in such cases, as, otherwise, there would not 
have been literary ability and intelligence on the part of their 
possessors. 

Phalanges, The first phalange denotes a great fund of 
will-power, self-reliance, domineering spirit. The second shows 
logic, reasoning ability, judgment. The third is the mount of 
Venus, w:hich indicates the passionate nature of the subject. 

When reading a hand, it is necessary to ascertain whether 
a subject has more will than reasoning power or vice versa. In 
a well-balanced and excellent character, the two are eveAly 
balanced. Both must be large and well-developed, if the sub- 
ject is to be a leader of men, and possess enougn force to make 
nis way in life. 

First phalange. Hie first phalange, if broad and larger than 
the secona, d^otes strength of will. If shorter it shows weak- 
ness of will,\^nd if very short, it indicates carelessness and in- 
difference. If long, but with square tips, it indicates love of 
justice and strong will. In a soft hand^ this sign loses its force. 
If it is of medium length and size, birt is broad, it indicates an 
obstinate character; biit with a square tip, the possessor of sound 
judgment is indicated. « 

If very long, broad, and thick, furious impulses and uncon- 
trollable temper are denoted. This sign has Been seen on the 
hands of muraerers, hi^wa)moien, and cruel .parents. These indi- 
cations may be modifira by tihe lines and sighs on the palm. But 
they have been generally found correct as proimostications of 
misfortune. Sudi people shcHild be shunned. Sometimi^ these 



22 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


types of thumbs assume the shape of clubs, and are known as 
clubbed thumbs.' This is far more dangerous tlian any describ- 
ed hiAerto. The strength of the first phalange of the thumb 
should be gauged by a close examination of the breadth, thick- 
ness and size of the tips : square, sp^tulated, conical, or pointed. 

Second phalanse- ,The student should note carefully 
the fact that tnis phalange of the thumb is generally longer than 
the first. In very rare hands, the two are found equal; in which 
case, reason andf will arc found to be evenly balanced. 

When the first phalange is narrow, flat, and inclined to be 
pointed, and very small as compared with the second phalange, 
a weak will is denoted. Such people are nervous by nature. 

If both the phalanges are small, narrow, and thin, and the 
upper one inclined to be conical or pointed at the tip, and to 
slope down to greater width at the joint, the subject is obstinate. 

If the thumb is of a conical shape at the tip, with the first 
phalange long as compared with a narrow second phalange, the 
subject is inclined to be diplomatic and tactful. 

A full and clumsy second phalange indicates that the sub- 
ject has poor logical and intellectual powers. It denotes a lower 
type of brain. 



12 3 4 

Fig. 5. 

THUMB AND ITS SHAPES 

1. Supple thumb. 2. Clubbed thumb. 3. Stiff jointed thumb. 

4. Elementary thumb. 

« 

Sometimes a wasp shaped phalange is seen. It is a sign of 
a brilliantly intellectual *and tactful person, quick, sharp, and 
deep. This subject does everything in a diplomatic way, and 
knows how to approach people in the right manner, and to gain 
his ends by suitable means. 

• When the second phalange is long and the first one short, 
it is a sign of a good conversationalist as well as a thinker with 
excellent reasoning ability. He is, however, incapable ot reah 
izing his ideals. If the second phalange is short and the first 
long, a person who acts without proper forethought is denoted. 



THE THUMB AND ITS SECRETS 


23 


Such a type is prone to judge a situation incorrectly and take 
risks, act impulsively, and later repent. 

Some observations by ancient Hindu writers, A thumb is 
considered to be good, if it is placed high, fiilly developed, and 
round in shape. On the other hand, if it is short, flat, and 
crooked, it tends to bring misfortune and unhappiness. If a 
woman has a wide thumb, it indicates widowhood. If a man 
has such a thumb, he faces trouble, and lives a celibate life. A 
straight, round, conical, and soft-looking thumb is considered 
good. 

If the forepart of the thumb touches the second phalange 
of the first finger, it is a sign of a person who is an expert in 
engineering and Ae industrial arts, and learned in the sciences, 
philosophy, and literature. He is also a stalwart, physically. 

If the upper part of the thumb is wide and the lower thin, 
it denotes troubles in life. If the upper part is thin and the 
lower wide, the subject is quarrelsome. It the second part of 
die thumb is full, it denotes a widely travelled person. If the 
big toe of the feet of a woman is red, she is not held in esteem 
by her husband. If the thumb of a woman is somewhat round 
in shape, she is the wife of a rich person. If her big toe is 
round in shape she is constant in her affections. 



CHAPTER V 


THE MOUNtS 
* 

Mr. Noel Jaquin says: "Mounts are muscular pads. The 
student must be careful to observe their correct positions, which 
should be beneath each finger. These mounts bear a design 
similar in type to the finger tips, and it is only possible to 
observe their exact position by noting the position of the apex, 
which is the core of centre of the ridge pattern. The finger 
tips all bear apexes; all the skin's ridges running in a definitei 
pattern to a central point, which may be of circular formation 
or triangular, and the mounts of the hand bear the same type 
of marking. Therefore, if any of these apexes on the mounts 
of the hand are misplaced it indicates that the influence 
of the misplaced mount is weakened or overshadowed, by the 
indications of the mount to which the misplacement is drawn.” 

This indicates what a mount is, and its strength or other- 
wise should be judged by its height, flatness, or thickness. High 
and prominent mounts are strong; flat, ordinary mounts with* 
a marked depression are weak. 

Now a word about what these mounts show in the hand. 

Mrs. Katherine St. Hill, an authority on the subject, writes : 
"The mounts represent the senses, the natural impulses and 
emotions present in the character of a person; and the force 
' and intellectual quality of the ideas must be gathered from the 
head line and the method of forcing and carrying them out 
from the finger” (Book of the Hand). 

She compares the fingers to a machine, head and heart 
lines to an engine, more or less perfect, according to the way 
in which it is made, and the mounts to the forces of fire or 
electricity, i.e., the motive force behind the machine. When 
the forces are too strong, they wreck the machine and engine. 
TTie senses get too strong for the intellect to govern and ruin 
fate, when mounts on the hand are high, the lines poor, ana 
the fingers weak. Character, in short, depends on the strength 
of the mounts, head and heart lines and the thumb. Mounts, 
in other words, represenf ^the senses, passions and feelings, the ‘ 
natural likes and dislikes, of the subject. Strong mounts without 
vrill-power and commonsense obstruct the success of a person, 
and it is useless* to expect any good work from him. It has 
been seen that people possessed of an excellent head line and 
a good Mercury finger have failed to achieve anything in the 
world, because of the presence of over-developed emotions of 
various kinds in their character. As ‘a matter of fact, Aey are 
passive by nature, and they have become mere dreamers, wast- 
ing ener{^ in the gratification of the senses. When the mounts 



THE MOUNTS 


25 


are hard, fairly prominent and flat, good work can be expected* 
when weak, a kind of depression will be nbticed. When the 
mounts dominate the head and heart lines, the emotions inter- 
fere with the intellect and affectionate d^osition of the indi- 
vidual, and evil conseqt^ences follow. Tney should not en- 
croach u];>on the centre of the hand, for this points to the 
presence of more harmful qualities. * 



Fig. 6. 

MOUNTS & ZONES ON THE HAND 

1. Mount of Jupiter or Society. 

2. Mount of Saturn with its finger functioning as balance to the 

Character. 

3. Mount of Apollo or Art. 

4. Mount of Mercury, hox>e, cheerfulness or victory. 

5. Mount of lower Mars of aggression 6c pedagogic instincts & talents. 

6. Plain of Mars, the field of struggles and action. 

7. Mount of upper Mars, of resistance, resignation and courage. 

8. Mount of Moon or imagination. 

9. Mount of Venus or love, music or family. Its development denotes 

« materialistic tone of mind. • 

Zones. • 

1. Emotional or intellectual or ideal Zone represented* by Nos. 1, 2, 3, 

4 and fingers. 

2. Business or practical Zone of being sensible represented by No. 5, 

upper half of 6 and 7 as shown by dotted line. 

3. Zone of instincts represented by lower half of Nos. 6, 8, 9. 

4 Zone of imagination and sub-Conscious Nos. 3, 4, 7, 8 as shown 
by the dotted vertical line from betw^n 2nd 6c 3rd fingers 
down ward. • 

o. SpiiiLual and religious Zone denoted by Nos. 1, 2, 8 and long nail> 
Phalange of Jupiter and Saturn fingers. 


26 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


I 0. Zone of materialistic or wordly tendencies, tendencies denoted by 
Nos. 1, 5, *6, 9 as shown by the vertical line. 

Height and Elasticity of the Mount, This should be studied, 
for upoD these two factors rests the force of the subject's senses 
and emotions. , ^ 

The strength or weakness of the mount shoujl be read 
with the finger under which it is located as in the case of the 
mount of Jupiter, Saturn, the Sun, and Mercury, and in accord- 
ance with the height, elasticity, and toughness of the mount, 
as also the position of tl)e apex. The student should also note 
the incb'nation of the mounts to one another and the straight- 
ness of the lines in order to judge their strength and weakness. 

The Mount of Jupiter. Mrs. St. Hill calls the mount of 
Jupiter the mount of society and, according to her, “it repre- 
sents on the hand the instinct of gregariousness, our liking for 
our kind, society and its relation to ourselves. It also takes 
in our position in that society, our desires with regard to our 
fellow creatures.” It also denotes ambition, love of rule, and 
honest pride, religious belief, and a certain amount of self- 
assertiveness, togetner with a fondness for looking important in 
the eyes of others, and a disinclination to make new acquain- 
tances. The possessor of such a well-developed and shaped 
mount is as a rule healthy, handsome, and popular. He is also 
anxious to marry early. 

formal Development and Its Indications, When the mount 
of Jupiter is normally developed, it endows the subject with 
aU those qualities of head and heart for which the mount stands. 
Such a person will not be vulgar and ostentatious. He will 
attempt to get all the best things of life. If the index finger 
is normal and the marks on the hand are not unfavourable, ne 
will occupy a good position in life. He will be of a loving 
nature, and will go all oat to advance the members of his 
family, and would not be moved by unkind and ungenerous 
thoughts for others. A Jupiterian is a born leader of men, 
honourable, dignified, religious, ambitious, and a magnetic per- 
sonality He is likely to become a clergyman, statesman, poli- 
tician, diplomatist, school master, or lecturer. When the mount 
of Jupiter is abnormally developed and the finger is long, the 
subject will be vain, selfish, conceited and tyrannical. He will 
be gluttonqus, and, if the mount is developed, inclined to drink 
to excess. He will have poor health, from dyspepsia, conse- 
quent on over-eating and rush of blood to the brain, a disordered 
stomach, vertigo, apoplexy, gout, and sometimes lung troubles. 

If the mount is under-developed and the space under the 
first finger covered by criss-cross lines, the better qualities of 
Jupiter are not in evidence. The subject will not have the 
qualities indicated by this mount. He will lack ambition and 
w ill not take steps to improve his lot; in life. There will neither 
be sense of self-respect nor honourable pride, and he may stag- 
nate in his career. There will be elements of laziness, irreugious- 



THE MOUNTS 


27 


ness, and he will be averse to undertake anything on his own 
responsibihty. He will feel nervous, shy, and awkward in the 
presence of strangers, and in the social field he will not com- 
mand respect ana recognition. These defects are likeW to be 
modified, if the hand is ruled by the well-shaped long finger of 
Jupiter. 

Inclination and Displacement of the Mount, If the mount 
of Jupiter is displaced and inclined towards the side of the 
hand, it denotes pride of race, and, if inclined towards its finger, 
pride of family, and, if situated in the centre of the mount, 
personal pride. If the mount is displaced towards Saturn, it 
loses most of its qualities, and is influenced by the latter mount, 
and inchnes its subject to be more thoughtful and calculating. 
His nature is made more serious and morbid. 


It should never be forgotten that a pure Jupiterian type is 
not met with in life. Hence it is not possible for us to recog- 
nize him by his appearance. But a person with a predominant 
Jupiter mount and a long Jupiter finger is likely to be of medium 
height, very strongly built and inclined to be fleshy. He pos- 
sesses a clear smooth skin, pinkish in colour and healthy-look- 
ing, eyes large and expressive of honesty and kindly spirit with 
‘ upper lips thick as if somewhat swollen. He possesses a straight 
and weU-shaped nose, a large mouth with red full lips. His 
walk is stately and dignified. A Jupiterian perspires freely, 
and in most cases has been found to develop Daldness by the 
time he reaches the age of 42. Because of his physical strength 

i ^ou will find considerable hair on his body. He is a natural 
eader of men and possesses a clear musical voice for giving 
commands or addresses. His magnetic, attractive personality 
and confidence in his strength enable him to secure and lead 
without difficulty. 

For further information on the subject of mounts, look up 
Benliams Laws of Scientific Hand~Reading, 


Mount of Saturn, The mount of Saturn lies under the 
second finger. When normally and well developed, it gives a 
sense of fitness and balance to other emotions, and makes for 
seriousness. The mount and finger of Saturn are like the ba- 
lance-wheel of a person's character. It connotes prudence, 
earnestness, caution, a zest for mathematical and calculative 
studies, an interest and inchnation to •take part m all pursuits 
which have something to do with land like farming, agricul- 
ture, mining, and other rural undertakings. *Saturnians are 
said to find intense pleasure in country life. ,Of a determined 
nature, strong-willed, thrifty, and argumentative, they represent 
the type who renounce the world, and are solitaries, especially 
when Saturn is strongly developed, with the mount of Jupiter 
pronounced, in addition , to a long Jupiterian finger. Saturn 
delays marriage, and Saturnians avoid marrying early. In some 
cases they <fo not marry at all. A true Saturnian is a bom 



28 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


♦ thinker, and has generally a prominent knot of the fingers, 
which are long and knotted. 

A strong mount of Saturn should be judged bv noting if 
the mount is developed, and if all the fingers incline to the 
second finger. 

If the mount is exqessively developed, the subject has a 
distrustful nature, and is discontended with his alTairs. He is 
superstitious, greedy, and obstinate. He takes offence on the 
slightest provocation: it becomes difficult to appease him when 
his emotions are roused. If the line of head is long and straight, 
he is of an unforgiving nature. He is sometimes found to be 
too proud to approach anybody for even a small favour. Fana- 
tics, ascetics and revolutionaries in human society have Saturn 
excessively developed, so that it ends to cut them off from the 
mass of human beings, with whom they do not like to asso- 
ciate. It should be noted that this mount is seldom abnorm- 
ally developed, and, when such is the case, it denotes dangers, 
and the subject is liable to become insane. 

When Saturn is utterly absent, it is a bad sign. For it 
would tend to make a person imprudent, reckless and frivolous. 
He is alarmed bv trifles, and laughs away serious matters. He 
will suffer from fear, “a passive state of continual fear both of 
danger and of the consequence of any form of action.” 

Health Tendencies. A Saturnian is a purely bilious type. 
Owing to structural defects of the liver, his blood is poisoned 
by bile. Hence the skin lias been found yellowisb in hue. This 
tint shades his nails, palms, lines and mounts. He suffers from 
nervousness, rheumatism, hicmorrhoids, and varicose veins. His 
lower limbs stand in danger of paralysis. 

Displacement of the Mount. When the mount of Saturn 
is displaced towards Jupiter, it is a sign of self-esteem; and all 
the qualities denoted by Saturn oT<prrise an influence on the 
Jupiterian qualities and modify them. If it is inclined towards 
Apollo, the sunny nature of the subject is tinged with serious- 
ness and love of solitude. He begins to be a pessimist. The 
artistic side of the Sun mount is made grave and sombre. Be- 
sides, it also tends to make a subject happy w^hen alone. 

if Saturn is inclined to the line of Heart, it denotes an 
element of callousness, contempt and indifference. 

Now a ♦word about liis appearance. A true Saturnian has 
been described as being % a tali, thin person with a skin tinged 
yellow. His chin protrudes, and be has a low-hanging lip. He 
loses hair, when cpiitc young, and becomes bald. Beiiham says 
that his face is long, commonly called hatchet shaped from its 
thinness; his cheekbones are high and prominent, with the 
saffron-coloured skin drawn tightly over them. The cheeks are 
sunken, with the skin flabby and wrinkled. The eye- brows are 
thick and stiff, groxving together ovej the nose and turning up 
at the outer ends. The eyes are deep-set, and extremely black, 
with a sad, subdued expression, which changes only when 



THE MOUNTS 


flashes of anger, suspicion, or eagemesss stir his mind. His ears, 
are large. His nose is long, straight and thin. The nostrils do 
not dilate as he breathes But are rigid and stiff. 

In conclusion, it may be said that a Saturnian is usually 
an unlucky person, as he looks at the darker side of life and 
cannot appreciate the joy of living felt by a Venusian or Apollo- 
nian. He thinks and feels that this world is full of sorrow and 
misery. In judging a Saturnian, we must be careful and should 
not tnink that good Satumians are not found in this world. 
“Some of the grandest of men,“ says Benham, “noble, high- 
minded, and successful, belong to this type. Abraham Lincoln 
was one.** Satumians may be as eminent as Lincoln, president 
of the United States of America, but they may also become 
burglars. 

» The Mount of Apollo, The third mount is that of Apollo, 
found lying under the third or ring finger. Hindu writers call 
it the Vidya Sthana or the place cSr education and scholarship. 
Like the Jupiter mount it is considered good. The only mounts 
which exercise bad influence on character and incline one to 
criminality and vice are those of Saturn and Mercury. The 
rest may make a nature coarse oqcasionally, but do not denote 
inherent badness. The strength or otherwise of the mount 
should be judged by the lengni and shape of the third finger, 
as also its degree or development and the signs present on it. 

Health, vigour, love of the beautiful, genial temper, spon- 
taneity, versatility, brilliancy, and artistic temperament are de- 
noted by this mount when it is normally developed. Subjects 
with Apollo dominant are the ones that make others believe 
that life is worth living. If this element of brightness had been 
absent from life, it would have been very difficult for man to 
keep healthy and vigorous. All Apollonians ^e not artists or 
actors, but they are certainly the ones that love beauty in dress, 
home, business surroundings and every walk of life in which 
they are found. They enjoy life by force of their spontaneous 
nature, and help those around them to share their enjoyment. 
If the finger of Apollo is long along its finger phdange, &e 
mount finSy developed with the apex in the centre and accom- 
panied by a straight line of the Sun with stars on it, the subject 
stands a chance of becoming highly successful in business, as his 
rnametic personality, versame and brilliant nature attract ^ople 
to his side; and he is fitted to choose such articles as will meet 
the demands of the public, and he mil make money thereby. 
Thus, it may safely be concluded that success, wealth, and 
fame are likely to be won by the subject through his talent in 
the arts, through eloquence, amiability, physical beauty, gene- 
rosity, and inventive genius. Moreover, he is warm-hearted, 
but not lucky in his marriage as his ideal is not easily realized. 
He is not sensual. People with Apollo 'normally developed 
are sympathetic, lovable creatures, and have an element of pride, 
and, when they feel they are right, they do not brook contra- 
S 4 



30 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


.diction. They are generally said to have a broad view of reli- 
»on. Not dull tihemselves, they cannot tolerate it in others, 
^ey are sensitive, and form romantic attachments, which turn 
out to be unhappy, owing to their excessive idealization. They 
have originality. But there is no trace of vulgarity about them 
and dieir movements. Though desirous of praise, they are 
quick to detect flattery.. They are the TCople with intense 
likes and dislikes, and are attracted to thi^ of beauty instinc- 
tively, and hence a warning note should be sounded, in their 
case, that beauty is only skin deep. They are poetical, roman- 
tic and given to occultism. Apculo people are considered ex- 
tremely clever. They have a strong inclination to take up the 
profession of an actor, musician, composer, or author. Ir the 
lingers predominate in length over the palm, then the subject 
wiS be interested in intellectual pursuits, and may make his 
mark in poetry, architecture, drawing, painting, and the arts. 
He will become an outstanding man in business, if material 
tendencies rule him. 


If Apollo is excessively developed, the subject is vain and 
hankers after flattery. He has a false view of his talents, and 
an unfortunate inclination to be extravagant in his expendi- 
ture. Besides, there is an element of curiosity, frivolity, and 
envy in his character, and, if a woman flatterer comes his way,* 
he is led to his doom. If such is the mount on the hand of a 
person, his fingers have been generally found to be twisted 
with spatulate tips, with a long phalange of the thumb indicat- 
ing obstinacy, and a short second phalange denoting lack of the 
reasoning faculty. A little exercise of intelligence and reason- 
ing will enable the student to judge what kina of person has an 
over-developed mount. If this mount is deficient, the subject 
will lack many fine qualities. 

Health Tendencies, If the mount of the Sun is displaced 
towards Saturn, the seriousness of that mount is moderated, 
and it is believed that a love of children is found. If it is 
inclined to Mercury, the Mercurian tendencies and aptitudes are 
influenced by the qualities denoted by the mount of the Sun. 
Mrs. St. Hill says that a love of animals is die result of this 
inclination. 


Appearance of an Apollonian, The true Apollonian type 
is very seldom found in life. He is handsome and manly, with 
a stature ranging between the Jupiterian and the Saturnian. He 
is not fleshy like the Jupiterian nor lean and lan^ like the 
Saturnian, but*i$ shapely, muscular, and athletic. Ijbiere is a 
suppleness and ^ghtness in his gait. He is fortunate to possess 
a clear complexion, white skin, rosv cheeks, and an attractive 
look because of robust health. He has a thick growth of hair, 
and when he grows a beard, it is thick and full. He has firm 
round cheeks, with ^beautiful large eyes, frank and honest. The 
nose is straight and finely chiselled, with dilated nostrils, 
fluttering with emotion. On the whole, you will find this type 



THE MOUNTS 


31 


of person very attractive, and this explains why he fares so 
well in business. He has a full chest, which has a tendency 
to expand under inspiration. His voice is musical. The whole 
body is gracefully and finely built. Just as the mount of Saturn 
has the line of fate ascending to it from the wrist, and denotes 
when normally developed *a sign of an element of fatality in 
life against which human power reinforced by intuition and 
logic is often impotent; similarly, the mount of Sun has a line 
ascending to it, which is called the line of success or capability, 
and which, if finely traced on the palm indicates a fortunate 
career with fame and wealth as tne reward. This line, if 
straight and faultless, strengthens the mount of the Sun and 
makes for the success of the subiect. 

Mount of Mercury. The mount lying at the base of the 
fourth finger is called the mount of Mercury. It has been termed 
the mount of ch^rfulness and hope. The ancient Hindu 
writers call it the Jayasthana or the place of victory. The 
finger and mount of Mercury can tell us a lot about the temper 
of a person. This mount should be examined carefully to 
judge whether the good or bad side dominates. If the mount 
is good, it is a sign of outstanding success; on the other hand, 
if it is bad, it tends to make a person the worst of cheats and 
liars. 

If normally developed, it tends to endow its subject vrith 
eloquence, shrewdness, commercial aptitude, a taste for exact 
sciences like physics and mathematic-s, and an abihty to win 
success by studying them, inventive genius, quickness of per- 
ception, tnought and action, and a fondness for travel and the 
Dccult sciences. These qualities point to the fact that a Mer- 
curian can easily be a philosopher, physician, orator, inventor,- 
lawyer, savant, .astrologer, palmist, astronomer, historian, busi- 
nessman, and all those who work hard and study deeply. Be- 
sides, a Mercurian is a fluent speaker, and makes use of his 
kVit, gaiety, and tact in society. He easily becomes a leader, 
socially, and is seen surrounded by those who are intellectually 
disposed, interesting, or are something of a genius. He is a 
mimic. He is a favourite of little ones. In dancing, games, 
md sport, he is quite at home. 

Because of his ability to judge human nature and character, 
shrewdness, tact, mentm elasticity, love of travel, ^ study, ana 
ndustry, a Mercurian makes a successful doctor with a lucrative 
practice, more especially when therg'is a mark of "medical 
itigmata," %.e., a number of vertical lines on the mount; and 
1 long mercury finger. He also makes his mark in the busi- 
ness world; and Benham says that the Jewish *race is strongly 
Vfercurian in character and tendencies. 

People, bom under the influence of Mercury, are generaDy 
oved. They look young and fresh far inti old age, for they 
lo not allow themselves to be burdened with care and wony. 

If this mount is abnormally developed, it denotes deceit, 



32 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


treachery, a thieving disposition and show of ignorance. Thus 
a bad Mercurian , becomes a bar, thief and criminal. A business- 
man and merchant with this mark cheats his customers with 
ease and uses his glib tongue. An astrologer or palmist will 
practise occultism for the money he can make from it. Besides, 
he can also be a bank wrecker and a burglar. These people 
generally have long tw^ted fingers easily oending backward. 
Their palm is soft and obstinacy in their nature is indicated by 
a long phalange of the thumb. 

If the mount is deficient, the subject is not at all inclined 
towards the exact sciences, or any kind of business where calcu- 
lation enters. All the qualities indicated in this mount are 
absent from his nature and character; and the person is handi- 
capped by an absence of all those traits which enable people 
to attain success. 

Displacement of the Mount. If the mount leans towards 
Sun ana is normally developed, it is a favourable sign to have, 
for it augurs eloquence and a flair for scientific study. If it 
leans towards the percussion or outward part of the hand, it 
denotes talents for business, dash, and drive. If towards the 
heart line, the person is endowed with courage to face 
emergencies. • 

' Health Tendencies and Appearance of a Mercurian. A 
Mercurian suffers from nervous troubles, and fluted nails indi- 
cate this disorder. He is also bilious like the Saturnian, but this 
disorder is cured as soon as his nervous system becomes normal 
He is liable to stomach trouble and bowel affections. He is 
healthy on the whole. His own mental outlook keeps him fit 
A Mercurian of pure type is small in stature. In appearance 
.he is smart and has a forceful expression of countenance. The 
shape of the face is generally oval. The forehead is high and 
the hair inclined to be curly on the ends. TTie eyebrows arc 
not thick, but regular m outline, ieiidiiig sometimes to meet 
over the nose as in those ruled by Saturn. But this is rare 
The eyes have a restless and sharp look. They would see 
through you and would give the impression that you are bein^ 
judged. Tile Mercurian is slightly of a nervous and bilious 
type. You may see a trace of yellow in the whites of his eyes 
He has a large chest with shapely shoulders containing big 
lungs. The limbs are graceful. You are impressed by the 
well-knit body and graceml, smart appearance of a Mercurian 
This in brief is a picture of the good type of Mercurian. Bm 
there is a criminal type* as well. The fellow who represents 
this type is quick ana short, small in stature, with restless eyes 
rather furtive, and crooked fingers bending inwards. Witn a 
grilled mount, bad heart line, narrow quadrangle, and high 
stiff thumb, he can become a bank robber, pidcpocket, and 
dishonest gambler.. 

The Mount of Mars, The moUnt of Mars is double. One 
i.e., the upper mount, has its location just below the mount ol 



THE MOUNTS 


33 


Mercury and above the upper mount of the Moon, while 
another mount has its place at the base of the mount of Jupi-* 
ter, and is known as the lower. There is also the plain of Mars, 
located in the centre of the palm. A well-developed upper 
mount of Mars endows a person with self-controf courage, 
generosity, spirit of resignation and endurance, an utter ms- 
regard of difficulties, and a firm determination to carry out 
desired objectives, despite opposition. A subject ruled by Mars 
is a bom fighter; but it should not be concluded that a Martian 
is always a soldier. You may meet him in every walk of life, 
distinguished by his aggressive and defensive qualities. In idl 
hands. Mars has a development, and a deficiency thereof will 
stand in the way of success. The upper mount aenotes resist- 
ance and the lower one aggression. 

When the lower mount is developed, it endows one with 
a spirit of aggression, drive and dash to make his way in life, 
and courage to face enemies and difiBculties. This is cnaracter- 
istic of a soldier. 

When the upper and lower mounts are excessively deve 
loped, they denote violence, insolence, and blood-tliirstiness. A 
person becomes a materialist, sensualist, a boor. He is, 
occasionally, hot-headed and impulsive. 

. Wtien these mounts are deficient and depressed, timidity, 
want of push, a hesitant frame of mind, lack of ener^, agres- 
sion and self-possession are denoted. His success is Darrea. 

Mars, normally developed, inclines a person to the army, 
surgery, police, and engineering professions, where fire and 
risk are involved. Mars is connected with life-saving as also 
with the taking of life. An explorer must have Mars well- 
developed. 

Appearance of the Mars Type. The Martian is strongly 
built, muscular. He walks erect and looks as if he is always on 
the defensive. His head is said to be small and bullet-shaped. 
The back of the neck is inclined to be broad. The face is 
round. Tlie skin is thick and red, often presenting a mottled 
appearance. The eyes are large and bold, with the whites red- 
tinged, indicating copious blood supply. The mouth is large 
and firm, with small and strong teeth. The brows grow thick 
over the eyes. The nose is long and straight. The legs are 
strong and feet broad. To a tme Martian tne coming conflict 
creates no fear of danger. An army of genuine Maitians would 
not know anything except victory or tieath. The health of a 
Martian is robust, and he is a heavy dater. He is also amorous 
and strongly attracted to the opposite sex. 

Displacement of the Mount. If the upper* mount of Mars 
is displaced towards the plain of Mars, a person has a great 
love of danger, and if the lower mount is inclined to Veniis, 
and the upper mount is dirolaced towards Mercury, there is 
great fortitude and serenity ; if towards the S^un, there is poverty 
of spirit and meekness. 



34 


INDIAN PALMISTni 


Mount of the Moon. The mount of the Moon lies under 
'the upper mount of Mars and extends to the wrist. A strongly 
developed mount of the Moon makes the outer edge of the 
palm look rounder and higher. This indicates imagination and 
creative ability. A combination of a long, deep line of the 
head, signifying intellectual ability, a high mount of the Moon 
indicating creative and injaginative ability, and the long straight 
finger of Mercury, is the sign of a genius. 

When normally developed, fuller at the wrist than at its 
upper part near the mounl of Mars, it denotes a healthy imagi- 
nation, love of poetry and of i)ure mystery. The subject is 
pure of heart, Tliis development of the palm tends to keep 
humanity from becoming earthy. With this sign, a person has 
the trick of expressing himself well, and can enjoy the pleasures 
of the imagination. In the hands of linguists, musicians, com- 
posers, fiction or romance writers, this mount is strong. 

If depressed or absent, there is a deficiency of creative, 
original talent. The subject is one who cannot picture any- 
thing and is decidedly dull. 

When it is excessively developed, a person is apt to become 
flighty, imaginative to a dangerous degree, and sometimes has 
a tendency towards insanity. He is also superstitious, and sub- 
ject to frequent headaches. 

Health Defects. The health difficulties of Moon subjects 
are many. For lunarians have poor circulation, thin blood, 
white colour, and flabby muscles, a swollen paunch, and suffer 
from the disorders of the intestinal tract, sum as inflammation 
of the bowels, appendicitis and peritonitis. Tlie grills and 
criss-cross lines on the upper thira, middle third, lower third 
portions of the mount denote bowel trouble, gout and rheuma- 
tism, kidney, bladder and (if female) gynaecological troubles. 

A Moon subject is generally tall in stature, with a round 
face, slightly built but flabby and loose- jointed. His complexion 
is white and he is exposed to weakness of the heart, kidney 
trouble, and often dropsy. His head is round, the forehead 
low. The eyebrows often grow together over the nose. The 
nose is short and small, often turning up at the end, and some- 
times showing the nostrils vejry plainly. The mouth is small, 
with large {eeth. The chin is heavy, hanging in flabby folds. 
The ears are small and set close to his head. The feet are flat 
and large. 

Displacement of the Mount. If the mount is displaced 
towards Mars, jt denotes active imagination and inventive- 
ness; if towards the wrist, passive imagination and day-dream- 
ing; and, if towards the percussion side of the hand, a suspicious 
mind. 

Mount of Venus. The mount of' Venus lies at the base of 
the thumb, and is encircled by the line of life. Mrs. St Hill 



THE MOUNTS 


35 


says that this mount gives the natural affection of humankind, 
the love of mother for her child and of the husband for his 
wife, die two strongest emotions in the human soul. It would 
not be incorrect to call this the mount of love. There is 
another sign on the hand, indicative of love. It is the line 
which, according to the sa/ne writer, embodies the affection of 
distinterested friendship, seen in the acts of self-sacrifice. It is 
not necessarily directed towards persons, but is equally mani- 
fested towards causes and one's own country*. It is the founda- 
tion of patriotism and of a sense of duty. But the love of the 
heart line does not rule the world; generally, it is the victim. 
The development of the mount of Venus denotes the degree of 
warm-hearted love, generosity, sympathy and strong animal 
forces. Its development should be carefully examined by the 
palmist, for a wrong judgment is likely to attribute base desires 
to many subjects wno are otherwise filled with magnificent 
human qualities. When normally developed, it denotes pure 
affection, tenderness, charity, S3nnpathy, and a passion for the 
beautiful and simple, innocent pleasures. Tliere is also present 
a fondness for dancing and music. Count St. Germain calls it 
essentially the woman s mount, just as the mount of Jupiter is 
the man's mount. Subjects with normally developed mounts of 
Yeims are generally veiy lovable characters. They are kind- 
hearted, /generous, and friendly to everyone they come across. 
They are averse to quarrelling, discord, and strife of tongues. 
They are sweet-tempered, and possessed* as they are of a bright 
and sunny disposition themselves, they feel happy, when they 
succeed in making others happy. They indulge in all kinds of 
amusements, but, even when these are not available, they can 
feel happy. Very good dancers have been found to have a 
strong mount of Venus with pointed or conic fingers of Jupiter* 
and Mercur\'. An aptitude for cookery is denoted when the 
thick third phalanges of all the fingers are coupled with a pro- 
minent Venus. \^en the mount is over-developed, it denotes 
sensuality, lasciviousness, vanity, wicked coquetry, heartless 
selfishness, and excessive love of pleasure. When such is the 
case, the palmist should examine carefully the line of head indi- 
cative of self-control and judgment and look for a strong thumb 
indicating determination, for these are the signs that the sub- 
ject will be kept in the straight and narrow path. It is also 
necessary to examine the quadrangle, f.e., the space between 
the heart and head lines, which should .not be large; otherwise, 
the subject will be loose in morals. iPeople with such a sign 
are likely to abandon their position in society whten swayed by 
an intense passion. Women, with over-development of this 
mount, are inclined to be sensual, and are usually sterile. 

When the mount is hard as well as flat, and depressed and 
narrowed by the line of life, it connotes lack of the normal 
sexual instinct, cold heartedness, and want of the conventional 
virtues of sympathy, love, and warm-heartedness. With such a 



36 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


, Sim, people do not produce children. To judge the strength or 
' otherwise of this, mount, one should bear in mind marks such 
as criss-cross lines or grills. The Venusian is attractive and 
beautiful. There is a grace in his movements and his body is 
well-proportioned. His manner is easy. You will recognize 
him by his medium height, white skin, fine, soft and velvety in 
texture, oval or round face, finely made with nothing to mar 
its beauty. His face is effeminate. When he smiles, his round 
cheeks often show dimples. According to Benham, you cannot 
miss Venusian marks on the faces of young people, which con- 
sist of “three vertical wrinkles over the bridge of the nose 
between the eyes.*’ The Venusian has abundant, long, fine and 
silky hair. He does not naturally like a Jiipiterian become 
bald. The eyes being round or almond-shaped are sympathetic 
and. under the influence of the passions tliey become volup- 
tuous. The Venusian is definitely healthy, and the diseases 
from which he suffers cannot be located on the mount of 
Venus. He is subject to disorders of the nerves. Low types, 
governed by this mount, are victims of ailments, which will 
be foreshadowed by black dots or brown patches on the mount 
or the back of the hand. 

« 

Displacement of the Mount, If the mount of Venus is in- 
clined towards the outline of the hand, it denotes purity of 
character; if towards the Moon, a love of luxury and sensuality. 
If it is dispelled towards the life line, there will be want of 
dignity ancf modesty. 

Combination of Mounts and Their Indications, On all 
hands the mounts are present in one shape and strength or 
another. One should see how far each is outstanding, and 
what its indications are, and what they denote when read in 
combination. This method of reading enables one to judge 
what profession or occupation the subject is destined for. 

For example, when there is a combination of the mounts of 
Jupiter and Mercury, we can be sure that there will be love of 
the exact sciences, and a successful physician is indicated. The 
mounts of Jupiter and Mars, when prominent, denote self- 
confidence, bravery, and talent as a military leader. When the 
mounts of the Sun, Jupiter and Saturn are strong, one may 
infer there* would be excellent luck through life, and wealth 
and reputation will attend him. I’he mounts of Saturn and 
Mercury, well-developed • with good marks and lines, denote 
love of sciencfe especially medicine. But, if the hand is bad, 
the lines weak ^ina unfavourable, it is indicative of a cheating 
disposition. The subject is a thief or charlatan. With Saturn 
and the Moon strong and dominant, a person is a thief or char- 
latan. If on the oth.er hand you find the Moon and Venus domi- 
nant, the line of the head weak, the thumb small and supple, 
the subject will be a prey to his animal passions. Again a 
combination of Apollo and Venus with Jupiter and Saturn weak 



THE MOJNTS 


37 


>vill not help the subject, as they will incline him to sensual ' 
Ratification. Different mounts incline human beings to dif- 
ferent arts and sciences. An intelligent study of the mounts, 
fingers, and thumb will enable the palmist to read the nature, 
tastes, aptitudes, talents,, and mental shortcomings of his 
subject. 



CHAPTER VI 


CHEIROMANCY 

Tliere is an astral fluid, which is believed to radiate from 



2 

X X H- 


3 

<3 



c^rno O 





vp /|v 

Fig. 7 

MARKS AND Slf;NS ACCORDING TO WESTERN SCHOOL 
1. Star. 2. Cross. 3. Triangle. 4. Grill. 5. Square. 6. Circle. 
7. Spot. 8. Trident. 9. Tripod and Spearhead. 



CHEIROMANCY 


39 


the seven great planets that shine on ns, forming part of the* 
solar system. This vital fluid is absorbed by each human being, 
according to his or her capacity. Its ceaseless passage throu^ 
the hand leaves traces and marks which can be read in accord- 
ance with the laws of palmistry. 

It has l^een advanced that lines and signs have no real sig- 
nificance, inasmuch as they are produded by the hand s motions. 
If this were true, labourers and artisans, wno have to open and 
close their hands frequently would have a maze of lines on the 
inside of their hands, compared with those of the professional 
and leisured classes. A queen would not have far more lines 
and signs on her palm than the lady-in-waiting or a semptress, 
who overworks her hands. 

The principles of palmistry are logical and true. Our sub- 
conscious mindT is said to have something to do with changes 
that occur in the lines and signs of the hands in accordance 
with a change of occupation or character. Consequent in a 
change in our circumstances, and sometimes under the stress 
of a strong will, one would expect a corresponding change of 
lines and signs. 

This point leads one to question the doctrine of predestina- 
tion. According to the great lawgiver Manu : “Success in all 
worldly affairs oepends on the laws of destiny controlled by the 
actions of mortals in their previous lives and the conduct of 
the individual. The decrees of destiny are a mystery. We must 
therefore have recourse to means which depend on man.” 

Again the same sage says ; “The soul of man is its own wit- 
ness, tne soul is its own refuge, never despise your soul, the 
sovereign witness of mankind.” Further on he says: “The 
spirit enthroned in the heart is a strict judge, an inflexiblfc 
avenger, the Yama, the judge of the dead.” 

Thus we learn that the laws governing success in worldly 
affairs are mysterious, and are controlled by the actions of our 
previous life and our present conduct. In other words, the 
marks, lines and signs found on the hands of all persons at 
the time of birth, and after, are there in accordance with their 
Karma evolved in former existences. The same facts account 
for a particular shape and the build of the hand found in an 
indiviaual. That is why no two hands are alike. When the 
lines and signs grow deeper or fade away, it is the result of 
our present actions. It is a mystery, how these lines change. 
The fact of the matter is that the soul is a strict judge and 
witness. It is this soul that, in accordance with a change in our 
circumstances and ideals, stimulates the mind within us to move 
the nervous system and cause changes to appear in the lines 
on the hand. ^ Thus our life is the outcome of our past apd 
present actions — ^facts which can be clearly read from the 
hands. 


THE CHEIROMANCY OF THE HAND 

The Principal and Minor Lines and Signs, We now give a 



40 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


list of these lines as generally found in hands, adding others 
mentioned in leading works on palmistry: 

The line of Life or Vital. 

The line of Heart or Mensal. 

The line of Head or Cerebral. * 

The line of Fate, luck, or Saturn. 




CHEIROMANCY 


41 


The line of the Sun, Apollo, or brilliancy 
The first bracelet of the Rascette. 

The second bracelet of the Rascette. 



Fig. 9. 

MARKS AND SIGNS ACCORDING TO HINDU SCHOOL 

Fish. Conch. Canopy. Flag. , Tree, Temple. Tilangle. Pitcher. Lotus. 
Swastika. Moon. Ashtkon or eight sided figure. 

Bow. Sun. Spear. Sword. Spear head. 




42 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


‘ In the second hst may be given the following lines: 

The line of the liver, hepatica, or health. 

The girdle of Venus. 

The line of marriage. 

The line of the Moon, or intuition. 

The third bracelet of the Rascette. 

The Via Lasciva. * 

There are other lines, found on some hands, classified as 
follows : 

Lines found on the mounts. 

Lines of influence coming from the mount of Venus, or 
from the side of the line of Life are called by some 
authors the lines of worry. 

Other lines which may be called chance lines, having no 
special location. 

Lines found on the thumb and fingers. 

Signs. Besides the lines given above there are found the 
following signs marked by themselves in the palm, fingers, or 
thumb. These are: spots or dots, square, island, star, cross, 
triangle, grills, circle, the trident, the ring of Solomon, the ring 
of Saturn, the mystic cross. • 

We have so far given lines, signs and marks which have 
been dealt with by Western palmists, and it would be interest- 
ing to learn now from ancient Indian writers. 

The four main lines mentioned are: 

The line rising from the wrist and encircling tlie mount of 
Venus and ending between the thumb and the Jupiter 
finger is called the Pitri-Rekha or Gotra or Mitra, f.c.. 
Father or Family line. The Westerners know this as the 
Life line. 

The second line called in Western palmistry the Head line 
is called Dhuti ur Wealth, i.c., Matri or Mother line. 
The third line called the line of Heart is called tlie line 
of Life or Jivan and Shilgun. 

If these three lines are faultless and unbroken, a person is 
fated to enjoy wealth, longevity, and a happy family life. If 
otherwise, the result is different. There are three asceriding 
lines, which are found terminating under the first, third, and 
fourth fingers. These lines, if strong and faultless, give wealth 
and happiness to the subject. Besides these three lines, there is 
one more ascending linet, which, starting from the \vrist, goes 
to the base of the secoird finger. This line gives success in 
governmental Activities. Thus, there are seven lines. There 
is another line which starts from the base of the third finger, 
and runs down the palm. It is railed the Vidya Rekha, or the 
line of knowledge or scholarship. This line denotes knowledge 
and charity. 

If there are a number of lines running on the palm, it is 
indicated that life would be miserable, the disposition of the 
subject anxious. If only eight lines (referred to above) are 



CHEIBOMANCY 


43 


present, the life of the subject will be happy. If otherwise, he* 
will meet with many misfortunes. A hand with only three 
lines denotes poverty. Thus, besides the three basic hnes, there 
are five ascending lines corresponding to those mentioned by 
Western palmists : 

The line terminating on the mount of Jupiter, called the 
line of Jupiter. 

The line ending under the base of the second finger, called 
Bhagya Rekna, or the fate line. 

The Arogya or health hne, ending under the fourth finger. 

The line ending under the third finger, called Dhan or 
Vidya or Dharam Rekha. 

The hne of knowledge, starting from the base of the third 
finger and running down. 

Besides these, the following are also mentioned; 

Lines of children found on the mount of Venus and lower 
Mars running parallel to Pitri Rekha or the Life line. 

Marks and Signs. The following are the marks and signs 
mentioned only by Hindu palmists; they are completely ignored 
by European and American palmists. They have been seen on 
famous hands, and I have given examples in later pages of this 
book. 

Yav. 

Fish and its tail. 

Conch. 

Trident, tripatrakar a kamala rekha. 

Lotus flower (padma). 

Canopy, 

Circle. 

Shell. 

Triangle, big and small. 

Serpent. 

Pot or pitcher. 

Kuthar Rekha. 

Balance. 

Chained rascettes. 

The moon and sun. 

Temple. 

Tree. 

Flag. 

Bow hnes. 

Swastika. 

Diksha hne, or the line of renunciation. 



CHAPTER Vn 


RIGHT AND LEFl' HANDS 

Both the hands should be carefully examined, and the lines 
and signs noted. “The left,” according to a saying, “is the 
hand we are bom with; llie right is the nand we make.” Thus 
the left indicates hereditary tendendira, possibilities, family 
characteristics, race terideacfes, ^rfTcuTarly in the matter of 
healfh!^ Indications of approaching illness, worries, sudden and 
.unforeseen "Hangers, coming marriage, impending dishonour, 
fu^e“fame caii be found on the left hand. 

The ideas and emotions before they are translated into 
action, fears fancied or real, and troubles which influence our 
life in any way can also be read from the left hand. Moreover, 
unenterpming, lazy people have signs and marks on the left 
hand. These are not found on the right, because of their lack 
of practice. Mrs. St. Hill rightly says that the Life line on the 
left hand will show the length of life shown by the subject’s 

E arents or ancestry, while the right will give us the actual' 
•nrth that nature, short, of course, of untoward accidents in- 
tends the subject to live. According to Vedic philosophy our 
present life is the result of our karma or actions in the past life, 
and, it is not strange, therefore, if it is believed that the left 
hand contains lines, marks, and signs which are in accordance 
with our actions in previous births or incarnations. Hence these 
' marks and sims are changeless as a mle; and from them we 
can detect all the changes in ideas, opinions, and general out- 
look of life. Thus, a change of religion may be read from the 
left, and ajchange of position from the right. I have found 
lines of Fate and the Sun and other good marks more clearly 
marked on the hands of persons bom in rich families with big 
balances in the bank or in land, or house property. 

The ri ght hand of s^-made pe ople has b etter m arks, lines, 
and signs , pecause sucH pedpTe use their wills to goltlieacr and 
make use of op^rluniGes ancT circumstances aha their fellosy- 
inen. Th^o people are &ed with ambition. They ha ve weU- 
^alanceJ”iwhds with strQng~tHuml)s7Ibhg and straight &gers 
of Mercury and Jupiter,_with flat plain of Mars. MfitiPPver, 
the hand ‘snows tM “occupation of "the owner, an3" a 
change ill social position wiB^e more' cxmveniently read from 
t he right than from the left' ^^SdicaBoris of marriages of men 
are tcTbe' read from the left aud that of women from the right. 

Ja India, it is \vell known that the right hm»l of man a nd 
left hand of woman should read. No'Indian pahhist would dis- 
regard' This' point. The Western writers do not su pp ort diis 
view. On_tne other "TjahHT'they ^vo^te^ Ae examinatk^ of 



RIGHT AND LEFT IL\NDS 


45 


both the hands of women and draw conclusions on the strength 
oTthe in^icatidhs oh the right hand. The view of the sages' 
of India that the left hand of a woman should be read is based 
on the evidence of facts which cannot be easily confuted. Tlie 
left hand of men, born in rich families, who do not have to 
worry™ iS'r ffi livelihood,* and who lead a life of liixiirj' and 
independence because of their .wealt|i and high social status 
in nicely marlced with lines and signs. If there .is jlq difference 
between the markings of the ri^t andTeft hands, they do not 
nse above the position in whi^ they are born. Women air 
the world over are generally dependent in their childhood and 
youth on their parents, ana after marriage on their husbands. 
Therefore, the Indian palmists attach great importance to their 
left hand, which, if clearly and finely marked, indicates a for- 
tunate career. But they also state that, in order to find out the 
fortune of the husband the lines on the right hand of a woman 
shbuld be read. The right hand of thdse'wbinen wlio pi^rsue 
an in dep endent career should be considered more reliable than 
the left. Besides, fhe left hands of children aged less than four- 
teen years, of men who are left-handers and of those who are 
effeminate in nature should be read. But for his education and 
knowledge, the kind of position he^ is to occupy, and the children 
he will beget, ^e right hand should be examined. 

In conclusion, fhe student should examine both the hands 
carefully, and arrive at conclusions in the light of observations 
made in previous paragraphs. My experience of reading thou- 
sands of Indian hands points to the fact that the r^ht hand of 
men ai^ women tells a great deal about the jnaateriaT p rosp ects 
an^' should be scrutfriized carefully, after comparing it viutn flie 
left and noting the differences. 



CHAPTER Vm 


PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE LINES 

«> 

At the time of line-reading, one should note the nahire of 

I ^ 3 





8 


B 7 



0 


lo 



Fig. 10. 

Straight line. Wavf line. Spots on lines. Forks. Sister lines. 
Islanded lines. Upward going lines. Broken lines. Elownward going lines. 
Chained line. Tasselled line. 


PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE LINES 


47 


the lines themselves, and see if they are clear, deep, even, and 
perfect. Defects should be noted. The colour is also import- ’ 
ant. The lines to be favourable should be clearly defined, deep, 
evenlv traced, straight, and pink. They should not be broken, 
islanded, chained, wavy, crocked, broad and shallow. It should 
also be noted how far the lines are undefective. Those better 
and stronger than others yield bette]^ results, and are more 
important. The nature of pecmle with clear-cut, straight, and 
deep lines is not vacillating. Ihere is a steadiness of purpose 
in their life, and their temper is even. They have a strength 
of character, which enables them to surmount difficulties. 
Broad, shallow, unevenly and badly coloured and traced lines 
denote weakness, lack of courage and failure of purpose and 
aim in life. For the depth and evenness of lines indicate a 
good constitution, vigour of body and mind, energy and con- 
centrative faculties. 

One fact is very important and should not be lost sight of. 

It is the number of lines found in the palm. Mrs. St. Hill says : 
“The fewer lines that are visible in a hand, the better. Other 
lines tend to confuse the main issues, to show obstacles in the 
way of success, to obstruct the line of thought necessary to 
complete the objects to be attained, and are sims of troubles 
and delay causea by circumstances or by lack of health.” Fur- 
ther on she observes : “There is great concentration on the main 
issues of life when there are few lines. The presence of great 
numbers of them shows that the brain is used in too many 
directions; and, if the lines are both thin and numerous, it shows 
weakness of brain, confused thoughts, and in excess a tendency 
to hysteria.” Besides, all vertical lines that go up the pahn 
from the wrist are good and favourable, whereas those that . 
cross the palm and are horizontal are harmful. The exceptions 
to this rule are the two main lines of Head and Heart. Again, 
we should note that, when the lines meet each other, they 
should cross and pass on. It is not at all good for the lines 
to stop against each other. Lines should be considered as re- 
presenting facts of life and virtues, net qualities which can be 
practised by all. 

Colour of the Lines, The paleness of the lines indicates 
weakness of health, want of ener^, and decision. In a sloka 
(verse), fourteen kinds of lines with their indications have been 
mentioned in the Hindu books on palmistry. They are given 
below, and a careful study of the same would show that be- 
tween the teaching of the Western and Eastern schools of hand- 
reading, there is hardly any difference. 

Well-coloured and bright, narrow lines indicate a wealthy 
person. 

Redness indicates hopefulness of disposition and an active, 
robust temperament. 

Yellowishness denotes^ excess of bile in the blood and a 
nature that has an element of pride, reserve, and selfishness. 



48 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Darkness of lines is a sign of haughty, revengeful, and un- 
forgiving nature. 

Dry and poorly coloured and traced lines are unfavourable. 

Deep lines indicate a fortunate and charitable person. 

A thin line indicates the acquisition of wealth. 

Sumilka or moolsahit denotes good fortune. 

Broken lines denote, failure of vitality and loss of wealth. 

Small and branched lines give a hint of troubles on the way. 

Unevenly traced lines denote loss of money. 

The lines that leave their position and place in the hand 
are not good and favourable. 

Small lines are unfavourable. 

The line that is clear, bright, and beautiful, of proper 
length, deep and round to look at is favourable and fruitful. 

Defects of Lines. A close examination of lines may indi- 
cate the unevenness of some. This type is deep in certain parts, 
becoming thin afterwards, sometimes growing oroader and shal- 
lower, and then assuming its depth and cleamess. It is this 
unevenness that characterizes ana distii^ishes it from others. 
The line should be read, and periods unfevourable or otherwise 
located according to the decree of cleamess and depth. 

Next we pass to lines which split up. These splits are 
sometimes ve^ fine, and should be examined with a mamifying 
glass. Sometimes, these fine branches have a downward course, 
and in other cases they seem to go up. 

These splits spoil the beauW and strength of the main line, 
and in cases where the line after the split is clear and well- 
traced, its strength and indications are not spoiled. The wider 
they branch off from the line and the deeper and clearer they 
are traced on the palm, the more significant they prove to be. 
If they are seen going down, they mould be regarded as un- 
favourable, tending to reduce the strength of the line. Rising 
lines increase the strength of the line, and, if they are seen 
mnning to any particular mount or part of the hand, they show 
that the increased efforts or energy will be in that particular 
direction. The student should note that such lines running to 
the mounts denote that the subject will be influenced by the 
qualitie.s of the mounts and would have a chance of meeting 
people ruled by the mount in question. 

The next defective line is the islanded. This is an un- 
favourable sign. The student should' note that, if a split after 
openi ng, away from the line travels for some distgnce an^]5en(^ 
flag tgwardsT me main line jOiilLS it, it will be found to make a 
sort pf I^p^^ich i^^^ island. ' These islands are snigll 

|is wi^Tas Pig. This sighTehds to weaken the lines and its good 
indications. 

Breaks in the Jines are frequently seen and always denote 
a defective condition and its failure.* Uncertainty, lack of deci- 
sion, and want of force are also indicated. Unless supported by 



PRINCIPLES GOVERNING THE LINES 


49 


a sister line or enclosed in a square, they are serious and fore- • 
tell danger. One of the worst forms of break that is seen is 
when the end of the line after the break turns back and starts 
to run towards the source. This sign, if found on the life line, 
has been interpreted by palmists as indicative of a certain death. 
This danger can be averted if this sign is surrounded by a 
square. 

When the line ends in a tassel, it denotes its weakness and 
destruction, more particularly at the end of the Life line, in 
which case it is a mark showing that the vital forces of the 
body would be dissipated and the ner\'OLis system exhausted. 

When the line ends in a fork, it is also considered a sign 
of weakness, but it is not as bad as a tassel or fan. When 
the fork is composed of two lines, it is only a split. 

A chained formation in any line denotes its weakness. If 
it is seeiT in the line of Heart, it indicates that affections are 
weak and changeable. The organic weakness of heart is also 
denoted. A chained line of head shows that the subject lacks 
‘concSitratwe ability ."“weakness of intellect,^ and lack of 'fixity 
df“ideSsT ‘ In short, this kind of formation of the line should be 
Interpreted as a sign of weakness, .and is an unfavourable mark 
to have. 

The dot is a mark which is not frequently encountered on 
the palm. But it should be noted carefully and the student 
should find its strength, depth, and size. The colour of the 
dot should be discovered, and conclusions as to disturbance 
and disorder indicated arrived at. 

There are little hair lines seen running by the side of the 
main line, sometimes joining it, sometimes falling from it. Tliey 
are called ca pillary lines. They indicate the same weakness,' 
as is shown by a chained "formation. 



CHAPTER EC 


SIGNS AND THEIR INDICATIONS 

Spots or Dots. A spot is generally the sign of temporary 
illness. A bright red dot if found on the line of the Head shows 
that the head would receive a shock or injury from a blow or 
fall. A blue or black dot is indicative of a nervous illness. If 
a bright red dot is seen on the line of the liver, it is generally 
considered to show fever, and, if found on the Life line, it de- 
notes a disease resembling fever. Yellow spots on the Life, 
Head, and Heart lines show biliousness and foretell an irritable 
temper. 

Square. The square is an interesting sign. It is called the 
mark of preservation. It shows that the subject would be pro- 
tected from whatever danger is threatened. If found on any 
mount, a person is protected from the operation or the excess 
of qualities denoted oy it. The presence of square around breaks 
in me line of Fate saves him from a heavy financial disaster, 
or loss of position and failure in a worldly sense. But, if thisf 
square is round under the mount of Saturn close to the Fate 
line, it only indicates that the subject would have a lucky escape 
from an accident. If the line of Head has this mark enclosing 
any portion of it, the student should conclude that a danger to 
the brain would be averted. 

The line of Heart enclosed by a square denotes heavy 
troubles in connection with a person dearly loved. But the 
heart break would be avoided, and if unfortunately this sign 
is present under Satnm^ some heavy misfortune would befall 
the beloved one. 

When the line of Life breaks, and a square encloses it, the 
subject will escape death. On the mount of Venus it shows that 
the subject will have a lucky escape from dangers brought on 
by the tumult of his carnal desires. 

When square lines outside the Life line and touching it 
are present, they mean imprisonment or retirement from the 
world. 

Island. Tile island is^ an unfavourable sign, and affects the 
lines or place .of the hand, where seen. It denotes hereditary 
weaknesses, and on the line of Heart it shows inherited heart 
disease. If seen on the centre of the line of Head, it shows fhat 
the subject has inherited mental weakness, and stands in dan- 
ger of suffering from a weakness of the brain or an illness 
affecting it. On th|i line of Heait under the mount of the Sun, 
it has been found to foretell a weakness of the heart or disease 
of the eye. On the line of Fate it shows that there would be 
loss in worldly affairs, and the subject would be anxious about 



SIGNS AND THEm INDICATIONS 


51 


what would happen to him in his future life. Besides, it shows 
that a person would fall into a trap and be cheated, due to the 
influence of a person whose fate is unrighteously connected with 
that of the subject. This island has been interpreted to mean 
in the case of a woman ai) illicit connection with a man. An 
island at the close of the Fate line is a terrible sign of loss and 
misfortune in old age. 

On the line of the Sun an island foretells that the 
subject would lose his name and position through a scandal. 
He will fall into the danger of being ruined financially or mor- 
ally during the period the line is marred by the island. 

"fhe student should note that any line running into an 
island on any portion of the palm is a bad sign, and spoils its 
rich and favourable possibilities. An island on the line of 
Health is a mark of serious illness. One should note the exact 
position of the sign. On the upper portion of the line, its pre- 
sence accompanied by small round nails, indicates throat and 
bronchial troubles; with long nails a delicacy of the lungs and 
chest; with short nails, a bad circulation and weakness of the 
heart. Lower down the line on the mount of the Moon, it 
denotes that there will be bladden and kidney troubles. 


V islajid high on the Life line in its early passage on the 

palm denotes that the upper part of the body. Tie., lungs and 
bronchial tubes, would be affected particularly if the nails are 
filbert; lower down, weakness of the digestive system; still lower 
down, kidneys, bladder and excretory organs. 


When a line forming an island on the mount of Venus, and, 
crossing on to the Marriage line is found, it foretells misfortune 
and disgrace to the marriage. If the same kind of line attacks 
the line of Heart, some evil influence will bring disgrace and 
trouble to the person loved. When it cuts across the line of 
Head, the subject will use his mental power and ability to do 
something dis^aceful, and, when it runs and bars the Fate line, 
some bad influence will spoil the position, success and fate of 
the subject at the date at which tne lines join and cut across 
each otner. The presence of an island on any mount reduces 
and spoils the qualities of the mount on which it is found. 


Star. The star is a sign of great importance and relates 
to events over which we have very little control. It /hows our 
succes s or failure and is indicative of d eath, h ea vy trouble , and 
misfortu ne, when a star appears onThfe Tnbunt of Jupitei^“The 
place where it is found shoind be locatedT Whep it is oh the 
highest point of the mount with lines of Fate, Head an d Sun 
beautifully and deeply traced, it is a sign which promises T 
life of honour, power^ and po sition. The subject will attain 
to the OTeatesl' helots of human greatness; and for the attain- 
nient of position and power there are very ,few marks which 
can equal it. 

It the star is off the mount and on die side towards the 
back of the hand, it is the mark of an am bitio us person, who 



52 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


himself will not rise to greatness, but will have a chance to 
come into contact with famous people. In exceptional cases 
when other marks and lines are very good this sign promises 
distinction or power to the subject. If the star is found on the 
left hand, and is also seen on the .right it indicates that the 
person has been born in a very rich family, and, before he dies, 
will rise to a higher rank and status in life. 

If the star is accompanied by a mark of the cross on the 
right hand, the person marries into a veiy rich family, and at- 
tains a high social position. When a line from the Life line 
is joined to a star on the mount of Jupiter, it is a mark that the 
suDject will achieve distinction by his intellectual ability and 
this will come to him as a surprise. This mark I found on 
the hand of a judicial officer who at the age of twenty-five 
beat the university record at the LL.B. examination. Besides, 
this is also a sign of unusual and unexpected elevation to a higher 
position in lire. This mark was seen on the hand of a Raja 
who at the age of fifteen received this title in an unexpected 
way. 

When the stgr is found on the centre of the mount of 
Saturn, it is a mj^ of a terrible fatality. It gives fame and 
distinlffiofi. It is a si^ found on the hands oFthe great marty^n? 
and presets like the Lord Jesus Christ. When off the mount, 
it shows that the subject will contact people who ^attain _ever- 
l asting fam e, after meeting a ten-ible fate, 

Star and the Mount of the Sun. When a star is found *on 
the mount of the Sun, it deimtes a brilliant position and ^eat 
weal th, but v ery little,. h appines s. Sometimes this position is 
.attaint af a' very advanccoage, when the subject cannot enjoy 
it on account of weak health. Besides, such people do not 
attain contentment, which, as Lord Buddha says, is the highest 
form of wealth a person can hope lo have. When it is off the 
mount, it brings tne subject into touch with very rich people, 
but himself does not become wealthy. When it is connected 
with the line of the Sun, and is in the centre of the mount, it is 
a mark of great fame and distinction in the field of art. Such a 
mark was found on the hand of the French actress, Mad^c 
Sarah Bernhardt. When the star is in the centre of MefCuty, 
and the finger of Mercury is straight and long, the line of Head 
deeply trated and straight, brilliant success in a scientific or 
business career is promised. 

When thq star is on* the upper mount of Mars, the subject 
will become famous by an exercise of the qualities of fortitude, 
patience, and exceptional will power. Its presence on the 
lower mount of Mars is a mark of fame and success as a soldier. 

On a strong mount of the Moon with a strong thumb and 
good line of Head, (he star shows fame and success in literary 
and artistic occupations demanding* an exercise of imaginative 
powers. This is a mark found on the hands of famous pq 
and novelists and other masters of the arts. On the hand, u ^ 



SIGNS AND THEIR INDICATIONS 


53 


line of Head is weak, the thumb weak, the subject has little^ 
control over his imagination which runs riol .and leads one to * 
insanity. Some writers on palmistry call it a sign of drowning 
and death by suicide. 

The star, if found on the centre of the mount of V enus, 
denotes that a person is endowed with an ani ma l magnetism 
which draws th e opposite sex to his side, and givesTiim success 
in the affairs dn bve. No jealousies' or oppositions will dgpfivS" 
iiim oFlhe spoils^ of conquest. 

When this star is on the side of the mount, the subject will 
carry on enormous business and affairs with people successfully 
in the field of love. A clear star on the second phalange of the 
thumb is a sign of wealthy Two or three stars on the back of the 
first phalange of the finger of Saturn denote a skill and ability 
in the management of horses j;)Ossessed by the subject. This 
sign is seen on the hands of famous horsemen. If the line of 
Fate has a star on it, it denotes that the destiny of the person 
would be blasted. With this sign, rich persons are reduced 
to poverty. The date should be read on the Fate lines. 

When a star is found on the Life line, it denotes that an 
accident would befall the subject. But with a line of Mars 
.supporting the Life line, a proverbial escape is indicated. 

If there is a star on the point where the line of Health 
crosses the line of Head on the palm of a woman, it indicates 
the weakness of internal sexual organs. Women with such a 
sign have been found to suffer from uterine diseases and on 
hundreds of hands it has been seen to show childlessness. 

Note carefully that no single sign, however excellent, should 
be read without reference to other signs, marks and lines on * 
the hands. For instance, a star on the mount of Jupiter with a 
poor line ojT Head, Fate, and the Sun becomes meaningless and 
unimportant. 

The Cross. A cross is not generally a good sign to have. If 
clearly marked and traced, it foretells some danger and disaster. 
There are very few cases on the palm, where it is favourable 
and good. 

If there is a beautiful, clearly traced cross not formed by 
an intersection of the main and long lines on the mount of 
Jupiter, it shows that the person will make a lucky and happy 
marriage. If this sign is found near the line of vitality, the 
marriage will come off at about the ^age of 16, if on the centre 
of the mount in middle age, if higher up, in the closing years 
of life. 

A cross on the mount of Saturn touching the Fate line fore- 
tells troubles, accidents, and death. If this sign is present 'se- 
parately and above tfie line, it indicates d,^ath by crucification. 
On the mount oVthe sun,* a cross indicates that the subject will 
fail to achieve fame and acquire wealth. But if the line of 



54 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


^Fate is strong and the line of the Sun rises boldly above it, 
* there would be a. few chances of success in his undertakings. 

A cross on the mount of Mercury has been found to indi- 
cate a cheat, a thief, one disposed to crooked ways and double 
dealing. 

A cross on the mount of Mars under Mercury shows that 
enemies would oppose the subject in a dangerous manner; and, 
on the lower mount of Mars under Jupiter, it foretells troubles 
and even death consequent on violent quarrels and affairs 

If a cross is found on the mount of the Moon, it foreshadows 
death by drowning and a deadly influence due to the imagina- 
tion. People with such a mark are drawn to water, and they 
are advised not to go deep into a pool. If a line of Voyage has 
a cross attached to it, it indicates a drowning tragedy. 

If there is a heavy mark of the cross on the mount of 
Venus, it denotes that affection would influence the subject in a 
fatal way. Such a person lives only once, and is foredoomed 
to failure. The presence of a small cross near the Life line 
denotes quarrels with relatives. 

When a cross lies between the line of Fate and line of 
Life, an opposition to the career by the near relatives is denoted. 
But if this cross lies between the Fate line and the mount of. 
the Moon, it is a sign that the subject will meet disappointment 
on journeys. 

When found above, and not touching the line of Head, it 
foreshadows a wound or accident to the head. By the side 
of the line of the Sun, a disappointment in position or an impe- 
diment in one’s career and its success is indicated. 

If it attacks the line of Fate, loss of money is sure; if near 
the line of Heart, the death of a loved one is denoted. 

The Circle, The circle is a rare sign, and it is only on the 
mount of the Sun that it is favourable and fortunate. If it is 
seen on any other mount, it denotes that the success of the 
subject would be interfered with. On the mount of the Moon, 
it indicates a danger from drowning. On the line of the Heart, 
a circle indicates a loss of sight. Its presence on any other 
important line denotes that the subject would be involved in 
misfortunes from which it would be difficult to free himself. 

The Grill. Tlie grill is generally found on the mounts of 
the hand and denotes that tne success of the subject will be 
hampered by the weakening of the qualities of the mount on 
which it is present. 

On the mount of Jupiter it indicates that the subject is 
proud, egotistical, self-willed. On the mount of Saturn, if 
found, it denotes that the subject will have too many aims in 
vi4w, and his efforts will be wasted. He is very selfish and of a 
melancholic nature. ^ 

On the mount of the Sun, it sho<vs that the person will be 
vain, foolish, and will have a great desire to make a name. 



SIGNS AND THEm INDICATIONS 


55 


On the mount of Mercuiy its indications are that a person, 
is unprincipled, with instabiutv of temperament. If seen on* 
the mount of the Moon, it foresnadows a restless, discontented, 
person with an unsettled mind. Its presence on the mount of 
Venus is a sign which denotes that the affections are unstable 
with no constancy in them. The subject is of a capriciously 
passionate nature. 

The Triangle. The triangle is often seen on the palm in a 
clear-cut form. If it is formed by a mere crossing of lines, it 
should not be considered a triangle. 

On the mount of Jupiter, if found, it is a fortunate mark 
to have; for it indicates that its possessor would have an un- 
common skill and talents to manage and handle men. This 
also is a sign of outstanding ability and diplomacy. This is a 
sign often seen on the hands of political and religious leaders. 

On the mount of Saturn, it aenotes that the subject will be 
endowed with a talent and tendency for mysticism. This is 
mark of great seers possessing high occult powers. Besides, 
an unusual ability in scientific work is also indicated. It is the 
sign of the yogi^ and was found on the hand of Swami 
Vivekananda. 

On the mount of the Sun, it promises success provided 
there is present on the palm a good line of Head. Its presence 
on this mount shows that the subject will not lose his head by 
an accession to celebrity. 

On the mount of Mercury, it denotes success in a scientific 
or business career. 

On the mount of Mars, it endows its subject with great 
presence of mind and calmness in emergencies. On the mount ■ 
of Luna, imaginative ideas are scientifically applied. On the 
mount of Venus it indicates that the subject will exercise great 
self-control, and will not himself be a slave to passion. 

The tripod or spearhead has been called an exc'ellent sign 
of success on any mount on which it is found. 

The Trident. It is a rare sign. When it is seen on the 
mount of Jupiter, it foretells success in ambitious pursuits and 
attainment of aspirations. On the mount of the Sun it has been 
found to indicate power through wealth, and celebrity in pub- 
lic life or literature. 

• 

The Ring of Solomon. The ring of Solomon is found, 
though rarely, at the base of the finger of Jupiter, and is sup- 
posed to give great occult power. If a subject with this sign 
is not inclined to occultism, it is a mark which denotes that 
the subject would h^ve rich commonsense and clear judgment 
in worldly affairs coupled with imaginative and intellectual ta- 
lents of a high order. Cheiro in his Language of the Hand 
says : ‘'When a love of the occult is denoted, it shows more 
the power of the master, *the adept, than the mere love of the 
mysfic as is denoted by the mystic cross.** 



56 


INDIAN PAlAilSTRY 


, The Ring of Saturn. The ring of Saturn encircles the Sat- 
urn hnger, and gives a love of mysticism. There are writers 
who do not consider it a good sign to possess. 

The Mystic Cross. Cheiro, the famous British palmist, re- 
fers to this curious mark, which is usually found in the centre 
of the quadrangle at either its upper or lower extremities. It 
may be formed by the line to Fate and a line from the Head 
to the Heart, or it may be as a distinct mark without any con- 
nection with any other main line. 

It is a sign of mysticism, occultism, and superstition. In 
order to judge the indications of the three qualities, the position 
of the mystic cross on the palm should be noted. If it is found 
close to the mount of Jupiter, the subject would be more in- 
clined to know how his ambitions in his career will be realized, 
and he will not be drawn to study the occult for its sake. 

When the cross touches the Fate line, the entire career 
and destiny will be ruled by a pursuit of occultism, especially 
when it is found under the mount of Saturn. This sign was 
found on the hand of Cheiro the palmist. Besides, this sign 
indicates keen intuitive powers to Know people one meets. 

Curious, Rare, and Unusual Signs, Mentioned in Books on 
Hindu Palmistry. In a sloka of the Hindu Shastra on palmis- 
try, it is said that it is an incontrovertible fact that GocT deter- 
mines age, actions, or karmas, wealth, knowledge and educa- 
tion and death of human beings. All these facts are to be read 
from the lines and signs of their hands. 

Urdo Rekhas. Vertical lines, like the lines of Fate, Sun and 
Jupiter; the fish line; the .sign of the temple; the Hal Rekha or 
plough line : these are the reco^ized Urdo Rekhas. Westerners 
nave treated at length of the indications of the line of Fate, 
Sun, Mercury, and other signs; but they have not touched on 
the marks and signs which have been considered as very im- 
portant by our sages. I have seen lines of Fate and even the 
Sun faintly traced on the hands of some persons; but I found 
them very successful. Tliis prosperity can be explained by the 
presence of f>ne of those rare signs and marks to which so much 
importance has been attached by our Hindu authorities. 

The latter regard three horizontal lines, i.e., the line of 
Age (Heart)^ the line of Head, called Matri or Dhan Rekha; 
and the line of Life called Pitri Rekha as very important. 
Besides these three lines they refer to four vertical lines running 
from the wrist tp the base bi the four fingers of the palm. There 
is also another line which runs from the base of the third finger 
downwards. ^ It is called the line of Knowledge and is a sign 
of honour. These lines though ccnsideied important by them 
do* not explain the facts of life and as such they have described 
marks and signs whiph have not been dealt wiln by Westerners. 
In this section I shall make an attempt to give indications of 
such as I have been able to see on the hands I have inspected 



SIGNS AND THEIR INDICATIONS 


57 


and to locate them on the imprints of famous hands given in 
standard works. I hope these signs and marks will be identi- 
fied on hands all over the world, together with the indications 
as given by me. 

It is a fact accepted by Hindu schools that our feet have 
the same marks as tnose on the palms. The marks and signs 
supposed to be seen on the feet of Lord Krishna are given in 
these pages. 

Yav (See figure). Yav is an important sign, found in the 
centre and base of the thumb, the rascette, joints of the fingers 
and the line at its start, as shown in the figure. If this sign is 
clearly found in the centre of the thumb, it denotes that the 
subject will be a distinguished scholar and will become rich and 
bring credit to his family and race. It is a sign of a happy 
existence. If this mark is found on the right hand, it indicates 
that the person was bom in the dark half of the moon, during 
the day time; if on the left hand, the birtli must have taken 
place during the bright half at night. If this mark is on both 
the hands and, if it is crossed by a line, the time of birth can- 
not be definitely told. 

If this sign is found at the ba/se of the thumb, it should be 
interpreted to mean that the subject will have a son. If this 
sign is on the left hand only, the person will have a son by 
adoption. 

If this sign is found at the base of aU the fingers, it denotes 
that the person will be licentious, and in some cases will meet 
death by drowning. When this sign is found on the Fate line 
at its start, it denotes the loss of one's parents at an early age. 

11 this sign is found in the centre of the Fate line it indi- 
cates that the subject will be tempted by the opposite sex. If 
it is found on the lower part of the Matri Rekha or Head line, 
it shows that there would be a promiscuous mingling of sexes 
of different classes of society. If the line of Heart or Ayu 
Rekha has a sign of Yav at the end on the mount of Tupiter, 
it shows that the subject will meet his death at a holy place. 

The Fish. The sign of the fish is a fortunate mark. It has 
been seen on the hands of men and women of the world. It is 
one of the four marks and lines indicative of the dc^ee of mate- 
rial prosperity one is expected to enjoy in life. When it is pre- 
sent on the hand, the mount of Jupiter has invariably been 
found to be strong. From the astrological standpoint, it is a 
point worth noting that the planet Jupiter is the lord of that 
sim of the Zodiac known as Pisces. This sign in the hands 
Pt men indicates that they will be masters of hundreds and they 
will be religious, charitable, and good by nature.^ They will 
occupy posts of authority, and there is a chance of uieir achiev- 
ing ^me in the field or scholarship. They will also command 
respect and honour in society. When seen on a woman's hand, 
there are few* marks whicH can beat it in indicating a fortunate 
existence from all points of view. She will have everything in 



58 


INDIAN PAUkflSTRY 


, life, wealth, positions, sons, and a husband who would have a 
great regard for. her, and who would not, unless very adverse 
and unfavourable signs are present on Ae hand, outlive her. 
The student should locate this sign above the wrist. If the fish 
has its face pointed to the side of the fingers, it denotes that the 
subject will continue to enjoy happiness and prosperity sdl 
through his life. If otherwise, the benefits will come late in 
life. 

The Conch. This is a rare mark. It is found on the hands 
of millionaires and famous people. It is supposed to have been 
present on the palm of Lord Krishna, and denotes greatness, 
scholarship, purity of life, and a spirit of renunciation of the 
world. 

The Trident and Triple Forked Kamla Rekha. This sign 
may be seen on the hands of all successful people in all wall^ 
of life. 1 have located it on the hanc^rints of great people, like 
Gladstone, Edwin Arnold, Bernard Shaw, Mrs. Beasant, Swami 
Vivekananda. You will hardly find a person rich successful and 
pro^erous, whose hands do not have this mark. It is regarded 
bv Western palmists as the sign of extreme good luck. In a 
sloka we learn that with this sign on the mount o f Tuniter a 
pers on is i mmensely wealthy so that he owntalarge number 
of mansions ani^ pafaces where there is a place for accommodat-^ 
m g m^o r-cars. liio fses7<^eph^tsi He leads a Jife of great ^ag- 
riific ehce, ea se and comfort. iThisT is"^"sim, wHic^ has been 
m^rpreted to confer millions on a human being, and with this 
sign I have found people leaping into affluence from a lowly 
position. It is also a symbol^ greatness, wealth and goodness, 
if the other l ines are goocT 

Its position on the hand is on the mount of Jupiter comoin- 
ed with the line of Heart, as also the line of the Sun or Vidya 
Rekha on the mount of the Sun. 

There is also one more formation of this trident, and it is 
formed by the line of Fate passing through tfie point of bifurca- 
tion of the line of Heart, one fork of which is seen running 
to the Jupiter mount and the other to a place between the first 
and second fingers. This is a magnificent mark to have, and 
denotes great good fortune. It is the mark of a person who is 
highly sexed and has personal magnetism shown by the forked 
Heart line. , But his love is idealistic, and there is an element of 
romance connected with it. These three human emotions of 
sex, love and romance when under the direction of a vigorous 
and marked personality, denoted by the line of fate passing 
through the point of the fork to the Saturn mount, drive a person 
to great heists of achievement. In the character of suen per- 
sons elements of constructive and creative imagination are 
found. There is a balance and poise in their nature, and the 
result is that a genius in the field of activity denoted by the 
hand is produced. This mark has invariably been found on all 
successful and famous hands. 



SIGNS AND THEIR INDICATIONS 


Sign of Padma or the Lotus, The sign of the lotus is a rare, 
sign, and has the same indications as given above in the case of 
the triple-forked Kamla rekha. Avatars, like Lord Krishna or 
Shri Rama, had this mark on the soles of their feet and hands. 
Four signs — ^plough, lotus, pitcher (makar), conch— are indica- 
tive of greatness. The * absence of all these foreshadows 
obscurity and poverty. , 

Canopy, The sign of the canopy is a rare mark, and if it 
is found on the hand of a person it denotes that he is the best 
of men and lord of all. This mark again was supposed to have 
been seen on the sole of the feet of Shri Krishna. I saw this 
sim on the imp^t of the hands of Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer, 
Gladstone and Rabindranath Tagore. 

The Circle, The mark of the circle is seen on the tips of 
the fingers and thumb and their indications are as follows: if 
there is one circle, a person is clever; if there are two, he is 
good-looking; if three, luxurious. If four, poverty is indicated. 
The possessor of five is learned; of six, clever among the scholars; 
of seven, a hermit and recluse; of eight, a poor man; of nine, a 
king; and of ten, a government servant. 

The Shell, The sign of the shell, like that of the circle, is 
seen on the tips of the fingers and thumb. ' One denotes a raja; 
two, a wealthy man; three, a yogi, with great spiritual powers; 
four, a poor man; five, wealth; six, a yogi; seven, poverty; eight, 
riches; nine, yogi; ten, definitely a poor man. Read mese on 
both hands. 

The Triar^le. If there is a small triangle on the fine of 
Life (Heart), it denotes that men through their exertions and 
efforts, will acquire landed property, agricultural as well as 
house. They will lay out gardens. When a big triangle is 
formed by the lines of Health and Head, it denotes that the 
subject will be famous. He will master the occult and secret 
sciences and cognate branches of knowledge. He will be influen- 
tial, and possess a keen intellect. (See Figure.) 

If the triangle is formed by the lines of Health, Head and 
Fate, it is indicative of the fact that the subject possesses natu- 
ral powers of foretelling the future. He is a master of sciences 
and performs deede of other worldliness. 

A triangle on the line of Head {Matri Rekha) denotes inhe- 
ritance of property and money from the side of the motiher $ 
family. If seen on the line or Life or Pitri Rekha Medicates 
a rich inheritance from the father s side. If the line of Fate has 
a triangle, it is indicative of accession to money from an un- 
foreseen source. If there is a mark of the triangle on the ras- 
cette, it indicates accession to wealth belonging to others and 
also honour. 

The Flag, The sign of the flag is found on the hands of 
great men and indicates virtues of renunciafion and purity and 
strength of character. It also shows that the person ^1 be rich 
and enjoy the blessings of material prosperity and own all sorts 



60 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


of conveyances. This sign I have found on the hands of success- 
ful people. The. attention of the student is drawn to this sign 
found on the imprints of hands of men like Gladstone, Arnold, 
Mark Twain and others. 

The Line of the Bow. The line of the bow is a rare sign, 
and will be found on the hands of t)rinces and kings. On the 
hand of a millionaire, this mark was made by the two lines of 
Head and denoted a rich man, although the lines of Fate and 
Sun were shadowing it. (See figure.) 

The Line of the Tree. I’he line of the tree is a very impor- 
tant si^. It is seen on the hands of all successful people. It is 
a principle of hand-reading that a branched line, especially when 
the branches tend to shoot up, is a line of promise and fruit. 
Therefore, if the line of Fate, Sun, Jupiter, Life and Heart are 
full of ascending branches, they would be considered lines of the 
tree as understood by Hindu palmists. These lines may be seen 
on the hands of distinguished persons, like Gladstone, Vivek- 
ananda, Mrs. Besant, and others. On the hands of lesser men and 
women they denote that the subjects would acquire wealth, 
occupy high posts of power under Government, lead a life of 
happiness, and in the case of scholars, command honour among 
learned people, and be a souirce of help to thousands of people 
who come into contact with them. This was one of the signs 
on the feet of Lord Krishna, and must have also been present 
on his palm. 

The Serpent. The sign of the serpent is an unfavourable 
sign. It denotes opposition from enemies. 

Kuthar Rekha {Sword). If a kuthar rekha is seen on the 
mount of the Sun, it is a sign of trouble in life. 

The Balance. The sign of a balance has sometimes been 
seen on the hands of a shopkeeper. 

The Temple, fhe mark of a temple or :shioalaya is a rare 
sign and will be found on the hands of great, rich personages 
occupying very high positions in society. I have been able to 
locate it. It is a mark which may be seen on the hands of 
royalties, prcmhets and saints. Again, this mark was on the sole 
of the feet of Shri Krishna. It has been located on the imprints 
of the hands of Tagore, Bryan and others. A branch line from 
the pitri rekha or Life line ascending to the mount of the Sun 
denotes that the man will attain to the top of his profession and 
be honoured. 

The Mark* of the Sun and Moon. If the mark of the Sun 
and Moon is found on the palm, it denotes an honoured person. 
The sign of the moon indicates gentleness of disposition. Besides, 
these signs show that he will command appreciation at the hands 
or those he serves. 

Chained Rasceties. If all the three rascettes are chained, 
the indication is that life will be hard and money will be earned 
by hard labour. 



SIGNS AND THEIR INDICATIONS 


61 


Swastika, The swastika is a favourable sign to have. 

Diksha Rekha (Line of Renunciation), This line is found 
under the finger of Jupiter. Vivekananda and Gandhiji had this 
line clearly marked on their palms. The clearer and longer the 
line, the better the indications. Sometimes a half diksha rekha 
is seen and refers to the fact that the person will be disinclined 
to work for his material advancement. * 

Hanwant (Kapi Rekha). If the lines of Fate, Life, Head, 
Sun have the marks of triangles at the upper end, they are called 
kapi or hanwant rekhas. This kind of line indicates that the 
person will have a clear vision of the goddess Durga, Kali or 
Saraswati. A triangle between Saturn and the Sun indicates that 
the person will be a lord of yoga, and will be one with Cod. 
This mark was present on the palm of Swami Vivekananda and 
Gandhi ji. 

Black Dot, If the black dot is in the centre of the palm, 
it denotes constant acquisition of wealth, and if it is on the sole 
of the foot, it is a sign of love of rule and accession to govern- 
ment positions. 

It has been stated that if the marks of the fish, crocodile, 
kamala or lotus, conch or shankh are found on the hands, they 
indicate that the subject would be master of hundreds of rupees. 
If any one of the signs is present in the palm, the indications will 
be fulfilled. 

There are many other marks mentioned by ancient writers, 
but I have given only those which I have been able to verify 
and locate on the palms I have actually read. 

I give below the marks and lines of famous hands in accord- 
ance with the teachings of our sages. 

Marks and Signs on the Hands of Men and Women, The 
hand should be well-shaped, with long, flat fingers, with a good 
span, neither thin nor thick. They should all be set in a line 
on the palm, with the finger of Mercuiv long enough to rise 
above the joint of the first phalange of the ring or third finger. 
The fingers should, when joined together, leave no opening or 
hole between them. 

The palm should be well-coloured and evenly balanced, 
with the centre round, with no deep hollow, and broad. 

The thumb should be well-shaped, indicating strength of 
will and healAy reasoning powers. It. should have a sign of yav. 

The three horizontal lines of Ayu, i.e., heart, Dhan or Matri, 
i.e., head, and pitri or gotra, or the line of Life should be clear, 
evenly traced, deep, without break, and pink-coloured. Four urdh 
rekhas, or vertical lines ascending from the rascettes to the four 
fingers of Jupiter, Saturn, Sun and Mercury, if present, indicate 
an uncommonly fortunate existence. But all these are rare. 
Besides, a line rising frorr. the Life line to the mount of the Sun, 
indicates that the person will rise to eminence in his calling. Alll 
these seven lines should have branches, and make what the 

S 6 



62 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


^ Hindu pajmists call Briksh Rekha, or the line of the tree. This 
* point should be noted, as one of the utmost importance. 

The line of Heart should have three forks or a lotus sign 
attached to it on the mount of Jupiter. The line of the Sun 
should have a triple fork on the mount of the Sun. 

The following are rare signs. It is a mark of fortune, if two 
or more are seen on the IfandT In great persons, several are seen, 
but it requires practice to locate and recognize them: 

On the hands of kings, princes, and wealthy people you wiU 
find the following marks : the conch, fish, bow, lotus, tree, circle, 
canopy, and temple. On the hands of saints and great men are 
found the marks of the temple, flag, square, conch, circle, lotus, 
swastika, and Diksha Rekha in one form or the other. Even one 
or more is enough to make for greatness. On the hands of 
people who are generous, truthful, learned, devotees, peaceful, 
fortunate, inclined to go on pilgrimages and journeys, fond of 
residing at holy places, and inclined towards renunciation, you 
will find the marks of the triahgle, fish, conch, flag. 

In the Puranas, it is written that all the marks and signs 
given above were present on the hands of the incarnations of 
Shri Krishna, Shri Rama and die God Vishnu. 

As already stated, the marks mentioned above are rare, but 
when even one or two are seen, the indications are certain. 

On the hands of common men, you will not encounter them. 

The hand should not be Heavily lined, otherwise it will be a 
mark of {rouble. Wavy, broken and defective lines and signs 
denote failures and ilhhealth. 



chapter X 


TIME ON THE HAND 

How to Reckon Dates and Time on the Hand ; I now pro- 
pose, before proceeding with the study of major and minor lines 
to give for the edification of the student the systems followed to 
find out in the hand, with great accuracy, the time and dates 
and recurrence of important events in ones life both past and 
present. Count St. Germaine says that no palmist can have the 
pretension to read from the hand the day or the month when 
the events would take place. He, however, thinks that sudden 
calamities are often shown on the hand. He further goes on to 
say that the calculations made on the lines have been found 
accurate and reliable within a period of, sav, two years. Further 
on, St. Germaine observes that "there will oe notable divergent 



Fic. 11 

TIME ON THE HAND 


ces in the various types of hand as to measurement herein giveii. 
A hand with a long, slender palm will have, the figures on the 
lines thrown much farther kpart than will be the case in a short 
broad palm. But experience will quickly allow the student to 
make proper allowances for these differences to give him a sure 



64 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


, look, that will divide the lines of Life and Fate into properly- 
sized sections without any oAer compasses than the pair we all 
possess in our eyes.” 

These observations of the author are quite correct, and the 
student after a prolonged practice will evolve a system of his 
own. If he follows any of the systems treated of in books on 
palmistry in a blind anc^ formal manner he will fail. My own 
experience tells me that no particular system mentioned in any 
work of note can be guaranteed to be a hundred per cent cor- 
rect. I am giving a hand with the ages marked on it in the 
positions found by myself to be generally correct. 

I have found the principles of reckoning dates mentioned 
by Mrs. Robinson in her book. The Graven Pdlmy reasonable and 
weighty. I cannot do better than quote for the guidance of the 
student. 

‘In fortelling near events,” says Mrs. Robinson, “it is very 
common to antedate them two or three years, and, when fore- 
telling an event which is many years ahead, it is a very frequent 
error to place the date of the event a year or two later than 
it will really occur. One of the surest ways of avoiding these 
mistakes is to start reading the life from the very commence- 
ment, endeavouring to tell each consecutive year correctly, and 
allowing for the dates in the future the same spaces, compara- 
tively speaking, which you will feel sure, from your correct read- 
ing of the past, will be needed on that particular hand.” Further 
on she says : “The student vinll find that, as a rule, dates in the 
right hand are marked higher upon the line of life than those on 
the left.” 

1^1 shall now describe my way of reading time on the hand, 
which 1 have seldom found to fail.) 

As already stated, the student should start reading the life 
from the very beginning and endeavouring to fix impoitant years 
/correctly. The lines of Life, Head and Heart are to be read 
from the side of the thumb downwards, as shown in the figure. 
Lines of the Sun, Fate and Health are to be read from the 
wrist upward. The student is advised to draw a vertical line 
from the place between the first and second fingers to the line 
of Life below. Thejpoint of contact should be considered as the 
: twenty-first year. The years preceding this point and following 
\ it should be located in an intelligent manner. The line of Life 
^ should have the years marked as shown in the figure, but the 
reader would have to exdrcise his intelligence to arrive at the 
correct date. Practice alone would bring about the desired 
result. The dates and time to be found on {he various linef 
are shown in the figure, and the student is advised not to 
follow this method blindly, otherwise he will fail to arrive at 
the correct result. ^In fixing the time of events on the hand, 
the student will do well to note that if the mount of Jupiter 
is well-developed and strong, the subject will rise to a nigh 
position by the time he attains the age of forty-two. He should 



TIME ON THE HAND 


65 


find out if in this year there is any branch ascending from the 
line of Life, Fate, or the Sun. Such a person would go on 
making progress as he advances in years. Similarly, if Mer- 
cury is strong and ^dominant, the thirty-second year would be a 
favourable year, and would bring about changes in health and 
fate at the age indicated. ’When Saturn is favourable, the line 
of Fate is strong and well-marked. After the thirty-fifth year 
there would be signs of advancement, and his destiny would 
commence from the thirty-sixth year. On the hands with 
Saturn unfavourable and the Saturnian line faintly traced, life 
is full of struggles. But when this line of Fate is seen clearly 
marked, and this would generally be after the thirty-sixth year, 
the subject will begin to lead a prosperous life. Subjects with 
the Sun unfavourably developed would have an unpropitious 
mark on the line of Heart at the age of forty-five, indicating 
heart or eye trouble. People with strong mounts of Jupiter, 
Mercury, and the Sun, with lines clearly and deeply traced, 
start their career at a comparatively early age. 

Cheiro has given a method to calculate memorable years by 
the date of birth, according to the English calendar. The 
method is simple. Suppose the date of birth of the person is 
8th October, 1908. The important years, marking crises, would 
be obtained by adding figures nine to the date as follows : 8, 17, 
26, 35, 44, 53, 62, 71. 

If the date is the tenth, the calculation would be 1, 10, 19, 
28, 37, 46, 55, and 64. 

When the date goes beyond 9, the dates are to be reduced 
by adding the figures and arriving at a single number. Take 
the fifteenth. The calculation would be 6, 15, 24, 33, 42, 51 and 
60 

Another method which I have found very useful and illu- 
minating is to find out the destiny number in the following way* 

Suppose a person is bom on 28th October, 1897. He will 
be nileci by Mars and his destiny number will be 9. It will be 
an important number in his life, 

^ Put down the birth date in figures thus: 28-10-1897=10 
+ 104*7=27=9. Tlie destiny numbers are as follows: 

Sun 1, Moon 2, Jupiter 3, Uranus 4, Mercury 5, Venus 6, 
Neptune 7, Saturn 8, Mars 9. , 

If the destiny number as shown gbove is 9, it will accord 
well with its harmonics 3 and 6, and anv year the total of the 
figures of which comes to 3, 6 or 9 woula be a memorable year. 
In the case of the above date, I know that the years 1914, 1920, 
1923, 1926, 1929^ and so on were years memorable in the life 
of the person. If the figures of the years are added they will 
come to 3, 6 or 9. Destiny numbers 4, 2, 8 are also harmonics, 
and a date of birth like .the following 11-4-1922 would have 
the years, 1937-1939-1943 and 1946 memorable and eventful. 
T^e destiny numbers 3, 6, 9 do not harmom25e with 2, 4, 8, 



66 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


and any year which totals to a figui’e inimical to its destiny 
number would be unfavourable. Tne student should find out 
if the events marked on the hand are favourable or unfavour- 
able, and then verify them from the date of birth and the des- 
tiny number. My own method is to fix time in accordance with 
the principles described above. The date mentally fixed has 
been verified by the destiny number, and I have with very few 
exceptions, found this method fairly accurate. 

I shall now pass on to describe another method which I 
have been using with advantage. This method of calculating 
time for events on the hand has been mentioned in the famous 
work on Hindu palmistry known as Hast Sanjivani. This is 
here given with a view both to enable the student to use it, 
and to stimulate further research. 

There are three phalanges in each finger and thumb total- 
ling to 15 in one hand. Ea^ phalange represents one year and 
one hand would tihus tell events of 15 years. In the case of a 
man, we should start with the nail phalange of the little finger 
of the right hand and place the first year of life on it, and 
count the years on the phalanges of the fingers and thumb right 
up to 15. Then take up the^ right hand, and repeat the same. 
Tne 30th year would be placed on the third phalange of the 
thumb of the left hand, i.e., the mount of Venus. TTien pass' 
on to the right hand again and calculate fifteen years more, up 
to the forty-fifth year. In the left hand, another fifteen years 
would take you up to the sixtieth year. 

In this way, you can find the position of any year about 
which you would like to know. In order to find out it the year 
thus located will be favourable or otherwise, or to know the 
kind of events that will happen, you should examine the pha- 
langes carefully and note the presence of ascending or vertical 
lines, circle, Jo or Yav. If such signs are present, the subject 
will have children bom to him and would acquire wealth and 
attain a i^osition. But, if this phalange is marked vsdth criss- 
cross lines, star, deep dots or any other unfavourable sign, there 
would happen events foreboding trouble and w^orry. In the case 
of a woman, begin from the left hand, and go to the right to 
fix the years. 

Let me illustrate it by an example. A man inquires what 
sort of a year his forty-second will be. Calculating according 
to the method described jabove, we place this year on the right 
hand on the third phalange of the Jupiter finger. If there are 
vertical lines present, and they are not crossra by horizontal 
lines, the year will brins good luck and success to the subject. 
We should find out if the lines, marks, and signs on the pahn 
tell llu‘ same tale. It not, we should not say that the year would 
be favourable, but should modify our conclusions. Suppose the 
palm indicates that* there will be an. unusual rise of rortune at 
the age of forty-two, but the phalange tells that there will be 
obstacles, the conclusion in that case will be that success will 



TIME ON THE HAND 


67 


come, but after stout oppositions, find not to the same extent as 
promised by the lines on the palm. 

Besides this, Hast Sanjivani has also described how to cal- 
culate the month in which the event is to take place. The 
Western writers do not believe that a palmist, however able, 
can name by an examination of the hand, the month in which 
an event is to happen. I have myself found it hard to arrive 
at any correct result, and as such I do not propose to describe 
the method. 

The methods I have described in this chapter should be 
studied carefully by the student, who should exercise his discri- 
mination in evolving a method of his own. If he does so, he 
will attain a very fair measure of success as a hand reader. 



CHAPTER XI 


THE LINE OF LIFE 

One of the most important lines on the hand is the line of 
Life or vitality, which is found girdling the largest mount of 
the hand, namely the mount of Venus, as shown in the figure. 
(See illustrations 12 and 13). Th mount of Venus has on il the 
great Palmer arch, which is regarded as being closely connect- 
ed with the heart, stomach, and other vital organs of the body. 
On account of this fact, it is reasonable to conclude that the 
Life line indicates the length of the owners life as intended 
by nature and his health, good or bad, during the period. Dates 
and years of events can be read from it, and we can verify most 
of the events from the signs and marks recorded elsewhere. 
At the outset it must be stated that a long line of Life does 
not necessarily indicate a long existence. Cases have been 



LINE OF LIFE AND ITS VARIATIONS 
R O and T O indicating forked life line at the start. 

Life line R O W„ Health line F G joining Head line with a star 
^hovving delicacy of sexual system in *a woman. 

3. F E. Fork of Dte line at the end. 

4. W. Tasselled Life line showing decline of vitality. 



THE LINE OF LIFE 


69 


found where people with a long line of Life died prematurely.- 
In such cases, marks of death were found on other parts of tHe 
hand. There is another line on the hand which must be read 
along with this line, and that is the line of Health, I'he fact 
of the matter is that our^ life depends upon our health: and 
those who overdraw on the bank of health and waste their vital 
forces come to an early end. The line of Health is the most 
capricious of lines ana it goes on changing with the years, 
becoming deeper or fading out, or at otner times assuming 
malignant forms portending death. Considered from the stand- 
point of health, the Life fine represents the stomach and the 
vital organs. When quite well-traced, deep, long, even, and 
well-coloured without any breaks or irregularities of any kind, 
it denotes a robust constitution, strong vitality, and freedom 
from illness. The digestion of such persons is good, and they 
keep fit throughout their life, and enjoy the supreme benefit of 
almost perfect health. 

So much for health; but there is another aspect from which 
this line should be considered. This is the psychological point 
of view, and this is important, so far as this line indicates the 
degree of vital forces that move ^ the body and create in man 
the qualities of emotional responsiveness, sympathy, kindness, 
and warm-heartedness. People with a full mount of Venus 
encircled by a line of Life have been found to possess a 
strength of animal instinct and a passionate disposition; while 
'those with a flat, deprv?ssed and ‘narrow mount girdled by a 
line have been found to be cold-hearted and unresponsive. Tlie 
student would have to bear this fact in mind while making an 
estimate of the character and nature of the person before him 
in order to find out how far he would succeed in life. 

The Life line in the right hand would indicate the coming 
events regarding health, career, etc.; and the left one would 
indicate the strength of the constitution, hereditary tendencies 
of life and health, the length of life of the family and of the 
parents. Therefore the student is advised to examine the lines 
of Life, Health, Fate, Head and thumb; and, if he finds them 
to be satisfactory in form and condition, he can safely tell the 
subject that he can expect to live to a ripe old age. 

The Character of the Line of Life. Shortness of the Life 
line denotes shortness of existence. The line tO be normal 
should be evenly traced, deep, well-coloured, and without 
defects of any kind. The breadth of the Life line denotes abun- 
dant robust animal strength, while its depth relates to people 
who have more nerve or will power. Under the strain of ill 
health, it is the deeper line that enables the subject to pull 
through and live on; whereas one possessed of a broader line 
is liable to collapse and does not possess, ^the same power of 
resistance. Veiy broad lines denote muscular strengm rather 
than strength Dt will. If the line is pale and broad, it denotes 
a weak character, with weakness of vitality. When thick and 



70 


INDIAN TAXJMJSTBY 


* red, it indicates violence and brutality of nature.* A variant 
thickness in its c6urse makes the nature fickle. If it is seen to 
be thin and fading out at any point Mdth a deep dark spot, 
death is likely to occur. If chained it denotes a tendency to ill 
health and a delicacy of constitution, If seen coming out in a 
great circle into the palm of the hand, and reaching or end- 
ing close to a rascette oi* the mount of the Moon, a long life 
can be anticipated. A break in its course is an unfavourable 
sign, and indicates a loss of vital forces, and, in many cases, 
death, unless this break is supported bv a sister line or is en- 
closed in a square. But the break should be verified from 
both the hands. If the line is laddered and broken up, a period 
of continued ill health is indicated. 

Now as to the indications of its start. If it commences 
high up from under the mount of Jupiter, it is a mark that 
great success and honours will be achieved. The subject will 
be ambitious, and a person of great self-control. On tne other 



\ Fic. 13. 

LINE OF LIFE 

1. R island at the start of Life line showing illegitimate birth. 

2. N M branch from Lite line to Jupiter. 

3. G P branch to Saturn. 

•4. G O branch to Sun. 

5. G F branch to Mercury. 

6. T O’ branch froM Life line stopped by Head line showng mental 

miscalculation and mistake: * 

Line of Heart A B, Life line A W, line of Head A O starting and 
joining at A X Y fine of Mars and from it M Y* to moon. 


THE UNE OF LIFE 


71 


hand, if this line starts lower down from the mount of MarS) 
it is indicative of a lack of self-control and -a quarrelsome dis- 
position, and irritability. These facts are important to have a 

§ roper judgment and estimate of the psychological make-up of 
le subject to gauge his success in tlie future. 


If the Life line narrow down the mount of Venus and is 
accompanied by a star on the conjuitction of the lines of Head 
and Health, it indicates, on the hand of a woman, that she will 
be childless, and, if she happens to have one, that she will 
undergo CTeat sufferings. (See GH. fig. 12) When the line, 
running tor some distance on the palm leaves its place and 
course, and runs lower to the mount of the Moon, it denotes 
serious diseases of the genitalia of women. 


If the line bends onwards towards the opposite side of the 
palm, that person will end his days in a far-ott land. 

The Line of Life in Connection with the Other Principal 
Lines, If the lines of Life and Head are clearly connected at 
the start and run on to some distance, it denotes that the sub* 
ject would lead life in a wise, cautious and sensible way. But 
this mark gives a sensitive and nervous disposition, especially 
when everting affecting the self is concerned. 

Separated from the line of Head, especially when a wide 
space between is filled with a network of little lines, and the 
colour is red, rashness, foolhardiness amounting to folly, is 
denoted. It also sometimes makes a person rough and brusque 
in his behaviour. 


If the space between the two lines at the start is small oi 
medium, the subject is energetic and possesses a go-ahead 
spirit. There is a lack of the element of caution, prudence, in 
his mentality. But it is a magnificent sign to possess, for such 
persons pursue a public career, for they are more free to carry 
out their plans and ideals. But the impulsiveness of tempera- 
ment must be held in check to ensure success in undertaldngs. 

If the space betwen the two lines is very wide, it is a sure 
sign of over-confidence, foolhardiness, rashness, impulsiveness, 
and unreasonableness in everydiing undertaken. 

When the lines of Life, Head and Heart are all joined 
together at the commencement, it is a very unfortunate sign indi- 
cating that the subject will be involved in danger and cata- 
strophes occasioned by his utter foolishness md defective 
temperament. So far as affections are concerned they are un- 
fortunate and they are inspired by *an all consuming affection 
for the wrong persons, or support the cause of an undeserving 
individual, and will not swerve an inch from the path, for they 
nfeel that it is their solemn duty to stick to the course, and the 
result is misfortune and tragedy. Besides, such people are itot 
endowed with keen perception and fail to., understand the real 
state of affairs. (See Fiure 13). 

When the line of life lies close to the thumb, especially if 
the line of Liver and Head are joined by a star, it denotes steri- 



72 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


lity in a woman. As it restricts the mount of Venus, it is a 
sign of weak vitality. Such people have feeble passion and 
love affairs, and rarely beget cniloren. 

When the line of Life in its course joins the line of Fate and 
from there runs together in one lin^, it denotes that the sub- 
ject after the date indicated by the point of contact,’ will live 
on fate, and, if a branch' line of the broken life line joins the 
Fate line, it indicates that there was great danger to life which 
was averted owing to good luck. 

Branches, Forks, and Islands at the Beginning and End of 
the Life Line: When the line of Life has a clear and simple 
fork at the start and the hand is good, it denotes that the sub- 
ject is just, and there is steadfastness in his conduct. But, if the 
nand is not good, this sign denotes vanity, indecision and 
fantasy. If the fork starts from the side of the hand, it has been 
considered a mark of inconstancy. If the line of Life is forked 
in the centre of its course, it is a sign of diminishing vital forces 
of the body. If the line of Life is forked, and a branch of it 
runs to the mount of the Moon, on a firm and good hand, it 
denotes restlessness and a desire to undertake journeys, but in 
a soft and flabby hand with a sloping and weak line of Head,, it 
indicates a restlessness, which may be satisfied in riotous living, , 
intemperance, or vice of some kind. I have seen hands witn 
this sign, and the possessors were found to be addicted to into- 
xicating dnigs. In some case^ inheritances have been destroyed 
and careers mined. 

If the line is forked at the end, the subject overworks in 
old age, and is ultimately reduced to poverty. 

If the line is forked and one branch goes to the mount of 
the Moon, life will end in poverty away from the land of one's 
birth. It is also indicative of bladder troubles and diabetes. 

If the line is tasselled at the end, it is a sign of poverty and 
poor health in old age. If the tassel mns to the mount of the 
Moon, the subject may become insane. 

A clear island at the start of the life line denotes illegiti- 
macy, and there is a msy terv connected with the person's birth. 
(See Figure 13). 

Branches of the Life Line, All the lines that rise from the 
line of Life* are considered favourable and good. They denote 
increased power, gains, and successes. 

If the line after its rise ascends to the mount of Jupiter, it 
denotes that the subject will rise in position or step higher at 
the date it leaves the line of Life. The mount of Jupiter, when 
connected with lines to the Life hue, produces in man a strong 
desire and ambition to better his lot in life, and if these lines 
are uncrossed, cleaj.and strong, the aspirations of the subject 
will, without doubt, be realized, provided marks and signs of 
the kind are good. In early life upto the age of 21, these lines 
indicate scholastic success in ones school or college career, and. 



THE LINE OF LIFE 


73 


in some cases, when they have been seen before the fourteenth* 
or fifteenth year, successes and material advancement of the 
father were denoted. 

' If this branch is seen on the hands of a woman with other 
lines favourable, and the .hand evenly balanced and beautiful, 
it denotes a lucky marriage, and her accession to fortune by 
marriage to a wealthy man. If a s'tar is seen joined to the 
branch on Jupiter, the success in life whether in the form of 
marriage or otherwise will be sudden and unexpected. Women 
with such a sign have suddenly leaped to fortune. If this sign 
is on the hand of a man, he attains sudden and unxepected 
elevation to success. These signs I saw on the hands of a poor 
but beautiful girl and a law student. The former married 
happily and well; and the latter beat the university record at 
the LL. B. examination. 

But if this branch running to Jupiter is on t he hands of 
a woman with a weak line of Head rising from ther inside oTth^ 
Ofe Tine* ancT the mount of Mars, it ”9^6tes that the subject 
wilt tiaTr'"a'1tiffle self-cohtfoT and will use her mind to rule in 
a way that will make the life of the man she marries troubled 
and diflScult, so much so that he jvill curse the day when their 
hands were joined in wedlock. If this sign is accompanied by 
*the small toe next to a big toe longer than the latter, they will 
not be able to get on amicably together, as this sign makes the 
womans temperament self-willed , and unsuited for a married 
life. This also prefigures divorce or widowhood. 

If the branch starting from the line of Life runs to the 
mount of Saturn, it should, if the line of Fate is absent, be 
regarded as the line of Fate, But, if there is a separate line of 
Fate present, it should be regarded as a second line of Fate, 
generally running parallel to the line of Fate. This sign has 
been seen on the hands of famous and successful people of the 
world. This branch denotes that from the date it leaves the 
line of Life, the subject will begin to enjoy success in his ca- 
reer, and there will be increased gains. The habit of hard 
work and the feeling of self-confidence will be engendered, 
which will make his career successful. The student should 
read two successful years from this sign, one on the Life line 
and the other on the principal line of Fate from the point exact- 
ly opposite the point of the Life line from where* the branch 
shoots up. Sometimes accidental lines are seen falling from 
the mount of Saturn to the line below, and the student should 
learn to distinguish them from the branches of the line of Life. 
The rule is that the line at its start is always clear and thick, 
while at the end it is thin and fading. 

If the line ascends to the mount of the Sun, it denotes suc- 
cess of an exceptional and exalted order. It is a sign of great- 
ness and eminence. With this sign present, I have seen sub- 
jects rising from poverty' to wealth, obscurity to popularity 
and fame. It always indicates that the person will reach the 



74 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


ttop rung of his profession. On all successful hands it has been 
distinctly seen. It was present on the hands of Gladstone, Lord 
Kitchener, Lord Russel, the Chief Justice of England, Swami 
Vivekananda, Dr. Besant and Dr. Joshi, the well-known sur- 
geon of Delhi. (See illustration 1 3, C.O.). 

If the line runs to the mount of* Mercury, the success will 
be in the direction of science or business, and the reader should 
examine the fingers and their tips to estimate the capacity 
possessed by die subject to carry out his projects. 

If this branch is stopped by the line of Head, attempts 
made for a rise will be defeated, and come to nothing because 
of the follies and mistakes of the subject. Little lines rising 
but not crossing to any mount mean the wasting of vital forces 
in useless undertakings. This sign is generally accompanied by 
a weak thumb and an unanimated line of Head. 

Stgn^ on the Line. Dots, crosses, stars, and islands, if seen 
on this line should be considered unfavourable and foreboding 
evil in life. A square is a sign of preservation, and should be 
considered favourable. 

I have dealt with this important line of the hand from the 
standpoint of the Western school of hand-reading, and for the 
edification of the student I shall now give as clearly as I can 
what Hindu writers teach us. 

Hindu Palmists on the Line of Life. The line of Life has 
been called by Hindu palmists Pitri (father) Rekha (line), oi 
Kula (family) line. If the fact is borne in mind that we inherit 
vitality from our ancestors, the name Vital Line given to it by 
Western writers is justified, and there seems to be hardly any 
difference between tne teachings of Eastern and Western schools 
of palmistry. Besides, like the Western palmists. Indian writers 
too give this line the first place in order of importance. The fact 
of the matter is that this line is the most important in the hand, 
as on it can be read the chief events of the career of a person. 
Hindu teachers have classified it under eleven different heads, 
as mentioned in Samudrik Tatak Sudhakar. 

Sangod Line. The first kind is called the Sangod line. This 
is unbroken, good, and clearly and evenly tracea from begin- 
ning to end, tnick, round in shape, forming a semi-circle gird- 
ling the Veims mount. It is not connected, touched or crossed 
by anv other line. The indications of such a kind of Une are 
that the possessor enjoys happiness because of his parents. He 
is descended from a high family, and bears a dignified gotra or 
surname. He is long-lived, healthy with a strong^ constitution, 
wealthy, honoured, happy, and his work and efforts in life will 
command universal appreciation. He is generally bom in the 
dark half of the lunar period of the month. He is bom, 
though rarely, in thS' brignt half also. This description agrees 
with the indications of an unbroken line of life given by West- 
erly writers. 



THE LINE OF LIFE 


75 


Vigud Dehi Line, The second kind of line is called Vigud • 
Dehi line. If this line is circular and round, but descends 
straight down the palm, is beautiful, and clearly and evenly 
tracra and thick, it denotes the subject to be good and fortu- 
nate. He is bom in the bright half period of the Moon. 

Gauri Line. The third line is called the Gauri line. If this 
Pitri Rekha appears to be inclined and turned up in its course 
towards the second line, i.e., Matri or Dhan (Head) line, and 
runs down its course in fauldess form, it denotes that the per- 
son will be fortunate, wealthy, inclined to luxury, and that his 
birth takes place at the close of the dark half or in the bemn- 
ning of the Dright half period of the Moon. If there is a dark 
spot or til near the line, the birth will take place in the dark 
half. 

Rama Rekha Line. If the Pitri Rekha in girdling the Venus 
mount appears to be cramped in its lower course, it is called 
Rama Rekha, and is favourable and good. The student should 
in reading through these indications bear in mind that the 
Hindu writers have not treated these lines in a detailed way. 

Pargud Rekha Line. If the first kind of line, i.e., Sangod 
Rekha, on reaching the rascettes becomes associated with some 
lines at its termination, it is calleid Pargud Rekha and denotes 
that the subject will be fortunate and enjoy all kinds of happi- 
ness. He is said to be bom in the dark half and, if accompanied 
by a mole, in the bright-half period of the Moon. 

Nigud Rekha Line. If at the* time of commencement bet- 
ween the first finger and the thumb, it is connected with other 
lines, it is called Nigud Rekha. It indicates that the person 
will be fortunate and possess property, and beget children. He 
will be healthy, and ms birth wiU take place in the dark half 
period, even if a mole be there. 

Lakshmi Rekha Line. If the line has characteristics of 
both the Sangud and Vigud, i.e., in half its course from start to 
the middle, it is round in shape, and from that place onwards, 
it descends straight and long, it is called the Ati Lakshmi 
Rekha, and denotes that the possessor will be rich and his birth 
generadly takes place in the dark half. Some teachers are of 
me cminion that it takes place in the blight half of the moon. 

Sukh Bhogda Rekha Line. If the C^ra Rekha in its start 
and termination is associated with lines, it is called Sukh Bhog- 
da Rekha. Such a line indicates that the subject will be 
wealthy and enjoy worldly happiness and his hirtti wiU. take 
place in the dark half period ot the tnoon. 

Kuhudhi Kami Rekha Line. If the Gotra Rekha is broken 
at some points it is called Kuhudhi Kami Rekha. It denotes 
that the life of the person will be troubled. Being possessed of 
a crooked mind and intellect, he will do bad deeds, and all Ms 
actions will end in smoke. He will be disgraced, and his birth 
generally takes place in tl^e bright half. * 

Sarv Sukh Nasha Rekha JLine. If the Gotra Rekha is 
visible only in its middle course, and is seen in a dim state 



76 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


early in its course and place of termination, it is considered to 
be responsible for the destruction of all kind of jo'/s. This 
shows that the possessor will be full of troubles, and despite all 
efforts he will not enjoy normal happiness. He is born in the 
bright half. 

Gaj Rekha Line. If the Gotra Rekha is at any place asso- 
ciated with a mole, it is called Gaj Rekha, and denotes all kinds 
of happiness, and his birth falls in the bright half of the Moon. 

In a sloka Hindu palmists say that if a subject has the first 
kind of line in a faultless form with no unfavourable signs pre- 
sent on it, it indicates that he will have the backing and support 
of his father, who will sec to all his comforts; and, if this is 
associated with a good Matri Rekha (Head line) and the third 
Life line (Heart line), the possessor will have wealth and a long 
life. 

They say, further, that if this line of Gotra (Life line) and 
Dhan Rekha (Head line) are connected, he is said to build new 
houses, and if they have no connection at all, he is said to dis- 
pose of the houses he possesses. 

From the above description of this important line, it must 
have become clear that in the main aspects there is hardly any 
difference between the teachings of the two schools. Both the 
schools describe a faultless, deeply, evenly, and clearly traced 
unbroken line, as indicative of a fortunate existence. The teach- 
ings of the Western school are however detailed. 

Now we turn to another point. It is possible to know the 
length of life from the line of Life. Western palmists are un- 
animous in saying that the whole hand and marks, lines and 
signs thereon should be examined before calculating the length 
or life of the subject. They draw our attention to that impor- 
tant line, the line of Health and marks on the lines of Heart 
and Head and the mniints. The fact of the matter is that no 
one individual sign is sufficient to tell one’s life span. 

The teachers of the Eastern school state that longevity is 
judged by three main lines, i.e., lines of Life (Heart), Dhan 
(Head), and Gotra (Life). TTie details given by them are intri- 
cate and have not been verified and ifiustrated so* that it will 
not help the student to know’ the details. On the other hand 
confusion is likely to be caused. 



CaiAPTER XB 


THE LINE OF MARS. THE RASCETTES OR BRACELETS 

It is a fact many times verified that the line of Mars, often 
called the sister to the line of Life and three bracelets are 
necessary adjuncts of the Life line and the line of Health. 

Line of Mars. The line of Mars is called the inner line of 
Life and should be read with reference to the shape, size, and 
type of the hand on which it is found. This line denotes every- 
ming which relates to the vitality or the martial tendencies of 
the subject. This. sign has been found on the hands of all those 
people who fought their way up in life, struggled against ad- 
verse circumstances, surmounted difficulties anu faced accidents 
and escaped them. Cheiro found it on the hands of Gladstone 
and Kitcnener; and Napoleon had this sign prominently marked 
on his hand. Aristotle was familiar with it, and found it on 
the hands of several Greek generals. It undoubtedly signifies 
abouTiding vitality, and the student while examining the hand 
should carefully judge the way in which the overflow of vitality 
will be used. On a broad powerful hand with well-defined 
fingers and a thumb indicative of* a strong will and a reason- 
able use of the logical faculty, it will mean robustness and 
vitality essential for building up a great career. 

The first thing that I would impress upon the student is 
the fact that this line does not rise from trie line of life and 
has no connection whatever with it at its starting point. To 
be favourable, it should lie away from and parallel to the Life 
line which it strengthens. Its place very near the life line 
has been interpreted to denote a quarrelsome nature, love of 
litigation and irritability of temperament that brings one into 
conflict with one's neighbours, family members and others who 
happen to come into contact with oneself. If this line is found 
on narrow thin hands, these indications are very much in 
evidence. 

As already stated, on a broad hand indicating prudence, 
good judgment, and strength of will, a commanding position is 
likely to oe attained, and the subject has the capacity to bear 
down all opposition. 

If it runs only for a limited space parallel to the line of 
Life, it denotes that the influence is limited to the space Of 
time upon the portion of the line of Life it duplicates. 

Its great depth, breadth and red colour shows that the 
subject is of a violent nature, sensual disposition, and possessed 
of a masterful spirit. 



78 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


If this line of Mars has a branch shooting to the mount 
of the Moon, it indicates a craving for intoxicating drugs and 
an inclination towards intemperance of every kind due to ex- 
cessive animal heat and energy. 

Three Bracelets, The bracelets ^re those lines on the wrist 
shown in Figure 1. There are some authors who do not attach 
much importance to theiije lines. They regard only the upper 
one as important. On the hand of a woman, if the first brace- 
let is high up the wrist and strongly convex in shape, it denotes 
weiikness of the generative functions and danger is indicated 
at the time of childbirth. If a person has all the three bracelets 
perfectly formed, it is a sign of a lucky, successful and pros- 
perous existence. Ordinarily not more than two bracelets are 
seen on the hand. If it is cnained, life will be spent in struggle 
and toil. It is also believed that the three bracelets indicate 
health, wealth and happiness. The lucky possessors of a fourth 
will be very healthy. It is highly uncommon to have more than 
three bracelets. 

Count St. Germaine says that one bracelet clearly marked 
and unbroken denotes a life of 23 to 28 years. If two such 
bracelets a life of 46 to 56 .years is promised. And if three, 
69 to 84 years of life. 

If the bracelets are well-defined, well-coloured, and clear, 
health, wealth, happiness, and good luck are expected. 

If the first bracelet is chained, the subject will have to work 
very hard all his life, but will win success in the end. 

If the bracelets are badly formed, the subject will be a 
spendthrift and will waste his energies in luxuries of aU kinds, 
but this sign alone should not be interpreted in this light, un- 
less confirmed elsewhere on the hand. 

Lines springing from the wrist and going up to the mount 
of the Moon denote travel and journeying. 

A cross on the rascette is a sign of a difficult life ending in 
a peaceful manner. 

If there is an angle at the centre of the bracelet, money will 
be obtained by inheritance and positions of honour will come to 
the subject, in old age. 

Oriental Palmists ore Bracelets. Hindu palmists have des- 
cribed two kinds of bracelets, one of a common type as shown 
in the the Figure, called Yav Mala, i.e., a line having some 
kind of islands. 

Indications of the First Type. K there are three or two 
bracelets or one bracelet, they are (1) favourable and good, (2) 
good with medium benefits, and (3) iridicative of a life ot poverty 
and privation respectively. Sometimes when these lines are 
four in number or even tnree, and are seen arching round the 



THE LINE OF MARS. THE RASCETTES OR BRACELETS 79 


wrists, and are clear on the back side of the hand, the indica- 
tions are that the life would be happy. Three lines on the 
hands of a ruling prince and two on that of a woman are re- 
garded as good and propitious. 

The indications of the Yav Mala line as .shown in the Figure 
are: if two such lines are seen, the subject will be either a 
prince or a minister. He will be wealthy and wise. If there 
are three such lines visible on the back portion of the hand, 
they denote a person holding a position oi power higher than 
a ra/a. 



CHAPTER Xm 


THE LINE OF HEALTH 

The Line of Health, (See Fig: 14). 

There is one other line that needs treatment in connection 
with the line of Life. It is important and indicates a great 
deal regarding the health of the subject. Health, undoubtedly, 
is the first wealth, and all possible care should be exercised 
to protect it. 

A great difference of opinion exists regarding the part of 
the hand on which the line of Health commences. Cheiro on 
the basis of his observation and practical experience says that 
it takes its rise at the base of the face of the mount of Mercury 
and draws across the hand and attacks the line of Life, when 
the germs of disease grow in the system. They attain their 
climax when the Health line touches the line of Life. According 
to him, the line of Life relates to the promised length of life 
from heredity and natural causes, and the line of Health de- 
notes the effect of the kind of life the subject has led. The con- 
junction of these two lines if equally strong denotes the date 
of death. On the other hand, some other authors of whom St. 
Germaine is the most distinguished, say that its farthest starting 
point is close to the bracelets in the vicinity of the line of Life 
and its extreme termination is on the mount of Mercury. 

\ All writers are unanimous in stating that its absence is 
I considered a great boon, and is a sure sign of steady health, 
j strong constitution, a healthy state of the rierv^ous system, and 
(as a result, financial success. 

Character of the Line, if the line of Health is not joined 
with the line of Life, with well-formed bracelets, it denotes a 
long life, and a constitution with a great reserve of resistance 
to disease. When the mount of the Moon is developed and 
the line of Health is clearly traced on the palm, it denotes many 
voyages. 

If the line of Health is strongly coloured and red, with dark 
spots on the. line of Head, a feverish disposition is denoted. If 
it is poor, irregular, wavy, broken ancl in pieces it indicate 
indigestion. When it is thick and heavy, a great delicacy and 
many illnesses are indicated. When the line of Life is chained, 
these indications are more certain. 

When the line of Health is irregular, twisted, yellowish in 
colour, the subject will suffer from billiousness and liver 
complaints. 

When the line of Health is seen heavily marked and traced 
from the line of Head downwafds towards the liri^ of Life, it 
denotes that the nervous system has been overstrained and the 



THE LINE OF HEALTO 


81 


subject stands in need of taking proper care of his health. I 
have never found this mark to fail. 

Red spots on the line of Health indicate rheumatic fever. 
The line or Health to be connected with the line of Heart and 
found stopped by it indicates heart disease. 

The line of Head islanded, the line of Health heavily 
marked when joining the Heart and .Head lines foreshadows 
brain fever. 

When the line of Health or any branch from it touches 
the line of Life, it foreshadows a severe illness and danger 
of death at the date where the two lines meet. (See Fig. 14, 
DT). 

The warning of an approaching end, if needed, is very 
likely to help the subject in escaping worst results. 

The line of Health with a loop or island in it near but 
above the line of Head, indicates trouble with the nose and 
throat and a disposition to catarrh. (See Fig. 14, K). 



1 . 

2 . 

3 . 

4. 

5. 

6 . 


Line of Health islanded K. 

E F Health line touching life line 
T D branch from Health line touching Life line. 

Line of Heart triple forked to Jupiter. 

Trident made with forks C O, R O, and fate line N O Q. 

a magnificent Sign 
Fork at the end of line of. Heart. 


This 


The line of Health with a loop or island below and above 
the line of Head as shown in the Figure is a sure mark of deli- 



82 


INDIAN PALmSTRY 


cacv and danger from the chest and lungs especially when the 
nails are long, almond-shaped, narrow and fluted. This sign 
means neuritis, and general inflammation of the nerves. 

The line of Health, when absent and the hands hard with 
pointed tipped fingers, is a sign of an active disposition, and 
when the mount of Mercury is well-developed, it denotes a large 
amount of vivacity. 

The line of Health indicates heart disease when it is irre- 
gular in its course, with red or bluish spots on the fine. 

If the lines of Head and Health form a big clear cross in 
both hands, it is a mark of a talent for occult sciences. 

If the line of Head slopes down to the mount of the Moon 
where it forms a cross with the line of Health, it should be con- 
sidered a mark of ai; over-heated imagination. 

[ If a triangle is formed with the lines of Head, Health and 
! Fate, it denotes a gift for intuition, a taste for the sciences and 
\ clairvoyance. 

If there is a branch running from the line of Health to the 
line of Sun, it is sign of change in one^s business and a talent 
for commerce. 

If a star is seen on the line of Health, it is a sign of steri- 
lity. 

Blindness is indicated, when there is a star close to the 
line, in the triangle or a cross high up on the line with a circle 
on the line of Head. 

The subject will become bankrupt if his line of Health is 
islanded, the line of Fate crossed by small lines, and the line 
* of tlie Sun, either absent or poorly traced. 

Hindu writers do not make mention of a line of Health. 
They refer to an ascendiiig line from the wrist upward towards 
the mount of Mercury. This, according to them, indicates a 
prominent business career and accumulation of wealth. 

Before we pass on to the treatment of other lines in the 
hand, it would help the student if the signs and marks of 
healthy hand are stated. 

Indications of a Healthy Hand. A healthy hand is one 
which is well-formed without excessive development of any part. 
The palm should be firm and elastic. The skin should be clear, 
inclined to be dry rather than damp. The nails should be large, 
bright, copper-coloured, elastic but not brittle. Half moons 
should be slightly marked on the nails. The mounts and fingers 
should be very nmi, foi flabbiness and depression in the mus- 
cles militate against good health. The colour of the palm 
should be even all over. It is always a sign of luck to have 
very few lines on tbe. hand. The principal four lines, i.e., Head, 
Heart, Life and Fate should be clearly, deeply and evenly traced 
on the palm, and they should lie in their normal places. The 
fewer the lines, the less the subject is troubled either physi- 



TOE LINE OF HEALTO 


83 


cally or mentally. Criss-cross lines, dots, and marks on lines* 
mounts and other places indicate various kinds of illness and 
disease according to their positions and shape on the palm. 
If these are absent, the subject will have uniformly good health 
tliroughout his Life. 

An Unhealthy Hand and Its Indications. If the hand is 
unhealthy, its -outline is abnormal. TTie fingers are crooked, 
the palm is fleshy, the skin is soft or damp. The nails are 
brittle or very hard, and bluish white. Tlie half moons are 
white in colour. There is a whitenes of the ridges, with bluish- 
ness and spots on the nails. There are depressions in the wrong 
places. The temperature of the hand is either too hot or too 
cold. There are abnormal lines or a large number of small lines 
covering the palm. The mounts are marked with grills, islands 
and other unravourable signs. Besides, blue or black dents or 
dots are seen on the lines. The lines are faint and seem to 
disappear gradually, or in places they are nibbed out. Depth 
of a line is a sim of vitality in the hand. Therefore it is an 
unfavourable and bad sign, when lines on the hand begin to 
grow dim, as vitality and life itself fades out. It is a fact that, 
with imMovement in health, there is a marked improvement 
in title depth and shape of the lines. When the lines fade 
but in both hands, it is a sure sign of the approaching end. 



CHAPTER XIV 


THE LINE OF HEART 

The line of Heart runs its normal course on the bases of the 
mounts of four creative planets, viz. Jupiter, Saturn, Sun and 
Mercury. It represents the creative instincts, the life impulse, 
emotions and important traits of character, which go to make 
the human personality. A close study of this line will tell us 
the nature of sexual tendencies and urge as also the sociable- 
ness of the subject, "'fhis line is the line of affection,” says 
Mrs. St. Hill, “of the highest form of love, of duty and conscien- 
tiousness. The mount of Venus is the symbol of the more ordi- 
nary emotions. The sentiment of love which is common to 
mankind, to all beings for each other, devotion of spouses, of 
parents for their children, of the other for those who care and 
protect them. The other side of attachment, the side of self- 
sacrifice, unselfishness or devotion to friendship, to causes, 
country, is shown by the line of Heart. Both the signs must be 
considered together. As, for instance, a low mount of Venus 
indicative of a cold disposition, may be compensated by a long, 
deep line of Heart indicating unselfish conscientiousness. A 
short line may be compensated by a full mount, giving in many 
cases the warm emotions that will overcome the desire of the 
subject to absorb himself only in his own concerns and to think 
only of his own good.” 

To make an estimate of the personality of the subject we 
must examine the line of Heart along with the mount of Venus. 
Tlie line of Heart indicates the nature of sexual tendencies and 
feeling of love of the subject, and the mount of Venus also 
denotes the same traits of character. The line of Head and 
thumb denote the amount of will power and self-control, and a 
well-marked girdle of Venus the nature of emotional responsive- 
ness and sensitivity. 

On the basis of my practical experience of having read the 
hands of persons in every walk of life, I have come to the con- 
clusion that the line of Heart is indicative of what makes a 
human personality, that which draws sexes towards each other; 
and it is this aspect of life upon which rests the fabric of 
society; with it is connected that institution which is called 
marriage, the lines of which are found on the mount of Mer- 
cury, running parallel to the line of Heart. 

Hindu palmists call this line Shil Gun Rekha, i.e., the line 
of character. Thabthis line tells us important facts about the 
character of a nerson has been proved beyond doubt, and we 
shall refer to tnis point when giving the main indications erf 
tliis line. The reason why the ancients called it the line of Life 



THE LINE OF HEART 


85 


is that in its course through the palm, it is influenced by the 
four creative planets, including the Sun which is the centre of 
our solar system, and is the source of all enerc)' and life. With- 
out the Sun, all life on this earth is unthinkable, and would 
cease. In numerology the Sun is represented by one, and the 
all-pei*vading creative energy, the first cause of this universe is 
represented by zero and from this springs the Sim god, the 
life-giver of earthly beings. It is not therefore a matter of 
surprise that the line of Heart has been named by the Hindus 
as the line of Life. In support of this view we may cjuote Mr. 
Noel Taquin, the famous English author of the bo()k, Martas 
Revealing Hand: “The sheen and lustre in the Tapestry of 
Life is given by the Golden thread of Sex. Sex is tne whole 
impulse of life; it is the driving, dynamic, creative force that 
animates the whole world. It is fundamentally the unconscious 



Starting Poinis 

1. OHM from top of Jupiter. 

2. P H M from centre of Jupiter. 

3. T E M from between first and second fingers. 

4. R M from Saturn. 

5. C £ M curving on lower Jupiter, ^ 

0. F E M branches from lin^ of Heart curving on Head line. 

7. W M chained line of Heart with hair lines falling from and running 
into it. 



86 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


•source of all creative effort, and however poetically this matter 
is treated, the reality of its vital importance cannot be exagge- 
rated. 

Character in Line: The line of Heart to be perfect must 
be narrow, deep, of good colour, finely traced, not wavy. It 
should be long and should not go beyond the apex of Jupiter. 
If it does, the subject is moved by too much enthusiasm for 
some object or cause. Tlie great master of the science, Des- 
barolles says that if it should encircle the mount to the Percus- 
sion of the hand, it denotes that the subject would be in danger 
of killing himself through failure in his devotion to the object 
of his affections. These indications are accentuated, if a person 
has a weak thumb, high Moon and sloping Head line. Tlie 
length and the straightness of the line denotes patriotic and 
philanthropic feelings, the strength of which should be judged 
oy the size of the mounts and other signs present on the hand. 
The depth of the line shows the amount of feeling possessed 
by the subject. A short line indicates a selfish and undutiful 
disposition. If the line be deep, the subject will care very 
much for few people and this also from a selfish standpoint. 
Such people are likely to prove good husbands and wives pro- 
vided they have a good thirnlb and mount of Venus. But they 
are not likely to be good friends. If the line by its thickness, 
depth and strength looks stronger than the line of Head, the 
desire for love will outweigh every other consideration and 
with a good Head line, the'* subject would be unselfish in his 
affections. 

Starting Points. The line of Heart rises from any one of the 
following important positions: the middle of the mount of Ju- 
piter; from the top of the Jupiter mount immediately under the 
first finger; between the first and second fingers; or from the 
mount of Saturn. 

When it rises from the centre of the mount of Jupiter, the 
subject has an idealistic type of affection in which there is 
firmness, strength and reliability and he would have fewer love 
affairs in his life than the one whose line rises from Saturn, 
(see figure 15. P M.). When it rises from the top of the Jupiter 
mount, from the finger itself, or from the outside of the mount 
it denotes that all foregoing qualities are in excess and the 
subject is a blind enthusiast ana it hurts him to think that the 
object of his love has faults. People with this sign have been 
great sufferers in tlie world of love, especially when they fail 
to meet one capable of fhe same kind of feelings. There are 
cases of course where this idealistic love has been returned. 

I Cheiro cites the case of Mr. E. Gladstone who had this sign 
in his hand and was blessed M'ith such idealistic affection (see 
Figure, 15 OM). 

When the lin^ of heart rises ver>' low on the mount of 
Jupiter it indicats tliat there is no strong sexual passion as in 
the Heart line from Saturn, but an intense depth of friendship 
for man and woman alike. 



THE LINE OF HEART 


87 


When the line ot Heart rises between tlie first and second 
fingers, it is a good sign, for it denotes the calm and degp tem- 
perament that loves equably. This is a mark of wonderful and 
unfaltering love. This is the love that endures even though the 
beloved has failings, which are all generously forgiven. The 
passions of the person are more subdued and calmer. Besides, 
subjects with this sign are not sentiafiental. They look at the 
affairs of love from a practical standpoint. They do not act 
foolishly and are sensiole, although quite strong in affection 
(see T.M. Figure 15). 

A line from the mount of Saturn, more especially when the 
hand is soft and flabby, indicates more sensuality than affection. 
Such a person is selfish in his desires, and loves only for the 
pleasure from sexual relations. Saturnian persons are cynics 
and mentally aloof, undemonstrative and pitiless. Cheiro calls 
them love’s hypocrites, and they are found both among men 
and women. Men with this sign have been found to be i)as- 
sionate, selfish and terribly insistent in their efforts to gain the 
object of their love. There is nothing in the world which they 
would not do, and they would sweep away everything that 
would obstnict their path of conquest, but it is a pity tliey 
will not display even little of tenderness or affection. If found 
on the hanas of a woman, it makes her an adventuress and she 
would stimulate love with surprising persistence so that the 
so-called object of her affection would oe deceived, 'rhese Sa- 
turnian hypocrites in love arc amazingly depraved in nature. 

When this line rises very high on the mount, often from the 
very finger of Saturn, all the above indications are found in a 
more intensified form, and whether people around them arc 
happy or otherwise they do not worry in the least. A jealous dis- • 
position is denoted by a line of Heart which is extremely long, 
more particularly when it is accompanied by a sloping line of 
Head running to the mount of Moon. This is a very unlucky 
sign to have. 

When the line of Heart is seen curving downward at the 
base of the mount of Jupiter (Fig. 15, GM), it indicates that 
the person would be greatly disappointed in his affections and 
friendship. Cases have been seen when with this sign, the sub- 
jects have met with a terrible fate, even in some cases to the 
extent of coming to a sad end. Generally such people become 
sincerely devoted to the wrong persons, who cAnnot return 
their love and for whom they go on entertaining a wrong love. 
But the student should remember that the possessors of this 
type of Heart line are capable of loving most sincerely and are 
endowed with the most affectionate nature. They are not at 
all proud and have been known to decide to marry one far 
inferior to them in social rank and wealth. 

A chained line of Heart or one with little lines running into 
it or coming out of it in ^ downward direction denotes a flirta- 
tious nature and it is only very rare when such give proof of a 
lasting affection (See W, Figure 15). 



88 


INDIAN PALMISTBY 


When a line of Heart with a chained formation emerging 
from the mount of Saturn is broad, it certainly indicates that the 
subject would be moved by the feeling of contempt for the 
opposite sex. Persons with this sign have been known to be 
merciless towards their opposite sex while feeling not the least 
affection, to deal unthinkable hard treatment to their so-called 
object of love. This is certainly a sign of depravity of heart. 

A line of Heart, pale and broad, indicates indifference of 
disposition. 

When the line of Heart is seen displaced towards the line 
of Head so that the space between the two is narrowed, it is 
indicated that the affections would rule the subject and would 
outweigh all other considerations. On the other hand, if the 
line of Head rises up and the line of Heart lies very high on 
the hand it is a sign that the affairs of love and affection are 
ruled by calculating and cold tendencies of the subjects. 

When either the line of Heart or a big branch coming out 
of it curves down on the base of the mount of Jupiter, some- 
times touching the line of Head and reaching the lower mount 
of Mars situated within the line of Life, it is a sure sign of an 
unfortunate disappointment in affairs of love, and it has been 
very seldom seen that such persons enjoy domestic happiness 
which owing to their kind and loving nature they so richly 
deserve. Their domestic relations are under the malignant 
influence of the planet Mars, 

When the lines of Head and Heart are seen in one straight 
line across the hand from side to side, it shows that the sub- 
ject is possessed of self-concentration. This is an abnormal 
mark and it makes one an extremist in all matters to which he 
applies his intellect and heart. 

It has been seen that such people are not only dangerous 
to the people they \o\ e, but dangerous to themselves also. You 
cannot afford to play with their feelings, for they would stop 
at nothing to carry out what is in their mind. Tn^ are blind 
to danger and consequently meet with untold sufferings and 
accidents, and it is not at all surprising that their end might 
come any time through obstinacy and lack of practical wisdom 
and good sense. 

A forked line of Heart on Jupiter is a sign of fortune espe- 
cially when"^ one branch is seen running to a place between the 
first and second fingers.* Such people are not only materially 
prosperous, but also gifted with a well-balancea, kind, and 
happy disposition in all affairs of love. 

When there are three forks forming a trident on Jupiter, 
it is considered by all writers of the East and the West to be 
a sign of great good fortune. This sign resembles the triple 
forked line of Pac^ma or Lotus which is a mark of fortunate 
existence. 

The thinness of the line of Heart indicates that ones 
nature is cold and heartless. 



THE LINE OF HEART 


The absence of the line is a rarity. But the line of Heart 
is sometimes found missing, and when sucii is the case, the 
subject is heartless and is not moved by those noble feelings 
which distinguish man from brute. Such people witli an ex- 
cessive development of the mount of Venus can be brutally 
sensual. 

A broken line of Heart indicates that the subject would 
lose a loved one and may not be able to recover from the 
loss. Such a person, with a straight and clear line of Head and 
a faultless line of Life, may live on, but internally his heart 
would be broken and love would not brighten up his life again. 

A forkless and branchless line of Heart is bad. If it is not 
forked on the mount of Jupiter, it should be considered to indi- 
cate poverty and if it has no branches on the percussion where 
it ends, it shows childlessness, 

A double line of Heart with other good indications on the 
hand means that the subject would be a devotee. 

It is not a good sign to have the lines of Heart, Head and 
liife united at the commencement. When this is the case it de- 
notes that some blind passion would pursue the subject and 
bring him to a sad end. Such a* person, besides, disregards all 
dangers and has been found to run very grave risks even of 
life itself. 

Downward branches from the line of Heart towards the 
line of Head without touching it indicate that the subject would 
be attracted to the opposite sex. 

If a line rises from the line of Heart and takes a downward 
course, cuts the line of Fate and touches the line of Head, it 
is a sign of the loss of a loved one. I have found it in most* 
cases to indicate the deatli of the marriage partner, and in some 
cases illness of a severe character bordering on death/ In two 
cases it indicated that the subjects luid a terrible sorrow when 
their daughters lost their husbands. Some palmists on the 
basis of tneir experience say that this sign indicates that the 
person would meet witli disappointment in love and because 
of a woman come to grief. 

When the line of Heart is found sinking towards the line 
of Head so that the space between the two becomes narrow, 
it denotes asthmatic tendencies, more especially xyhen the line 
of Health is weakly traced. 

When the lines of Head and Heart are branchless and lie 
very far apart from each other, it is a mark which shows that 
the life is deprived of aftection. 

When the line of Heart has an island and the line of Fate 
is also islanded, it denotes that the love of the subject is adulte- 
rous and will stop at nothing. 

Some More Observations. Mr. Noel Jaquin, the celebrated 
British author, refers to two types of sexual tendencies betrayed 
by the formation of the Heart line, the spiritual or mental and 



90 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


. the physical type of sexuality, explained by him thus : "A high- 
ly sexed mental type of individual would find great satisfaction 
in the mere presence of the beloved, the gentle touch of a hand 
and in the sensuous caressing of the beloved body, whereas the 
definitely physical types would find little or no satisfaction in 
this mentally contemplative procedure, they would be inclined 
in fact to regard it probably as a waste of time. The coarser 
physical urges would demand coarser or more physical ex- 
pressions.” 

The mental or spiritual type is denoted by a straight line 
of Heart rising from the mount of Jupiter. There is idealism in 
love, when such a line is accompanied by a girdle of Venus, 
pointed fingers, sloping line of a Head, a weak, supple thumb 
and a crowd of chance lines running all over the palm, the 
indications are not favourable. The subject is moved by romantic 
ideas and imaginative tendencies and is apt to be unhappy and 
disappointed in his love affairs on account of a shifting disposi- 
tion, He can, however, be happier, if he has a more practical 
and sensible mental outlook on these affairs of the heart. 



1. A O B, line of Heart .ccen with a deep curve indicates physical or 
masculine type of sexuality. 

2. COB, line of Ilcjkrt indicates on accoimt of its straightness spiritual 
or mental type of sensuality. 

3. Forks A O, C O of the Heart line show bisexual tendencies. 



raE LINE OF- HEART 


91 


A straight line of Heart, weak supple thumb and thin pointr 
ed fingers and sloping Head line indicate a 'tendency to homo- 
sexuality and masturbation. The student should not conclude 
that straightness of line denotes only the emotional tendencies 
referred to above. On the other hand, I have found subjects 
with a straight line of Heart forked on the mount of Jupiter, 
strong thumb and clear, straight or slightly sloping line of Head 
pure hearted and unselfish in disposition. They possess 
strength of character and an idealistic quality whicli enables 
them to be constant in their affections and avoid having loose 
and illicit sexual relations. 

If the line of Heart rises from a place between the first and 
second fingers or from the mount of Saturn and sweeps to the 
edge of the palm making a deep cur\'e, it denotes a masculine 
or physical type of sexuality, making the subject warm-hearted, 
full of generosity and sympathy. This sign if coupled with a 
sloping line of Head and a girdle of Venus, weak thumb and 
pointed or conic fingers indicating emotionalism, tends to make 
the subject lose self-control and act foolishly and allow himself 
or herself to be carried away by the strength of his or her pas- 
sions and become sexually promiscuous. Tliis tendency will 
sometimes be held in check by the healthy influence of the 
mount of Jupiter when the line of Heart rises between the 
first and second fingers, for the subject would not bear to see 
himself dishonoured, and a sense of self-esteem and pride 
denoted by the Jupiter mount ^Voald bridle his strong sexual 
urge. 

If the line of Heart is forked at the start, one fork running 
between the first and second fingers and the other to the mount 
of Jupiter, it denotes bi-sexual tendencies and as already statedf 
this is the best kind of heart line one can have. 

A person would possess enough general talents if there is 
good space between the root^i of fingers and the line of Heart. 

The Line of Heart as Interpreted hy the Hindu School. 
ITie teachers of the Hindu school of i^alrnistry call the line of 
Heart, the line of life and character. An examination of it 
reveals to us facts of human existence, the date and time of 
birth and the traits of character. It is said to be of sixteen 
kinds, the names of which need not be mentioned, as it has 
not been possible to illustrate and identify them from the signs 
and marks found on the hand. , 

In estimating the length of human existence they keep in 
view three main lines of the hand, the line of Vitality called 
by them Pitri Rekha, the line of Head called Matri or Dhan 
Rekha and the line of Heart called the Ayu Rekha or line of 
Life. According to them this line rises from the percussion 
under the finger of Mercury and runs to^the base of the first 
finger, and if unbiokeij and faultless,' ^uncrossed and well- 
coloured and deeply traced, denotefS that the person would live 
to a long age of 100 years, and according to some 120 years. 



92 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


If such a line ends on the base of the second finger, it denotes 
60 years and if it* is short and covers only the mount of Mercury 
only 20 to 30 years. 

Another method of calculating the length of life has been 
stated thus : Imagine that this line from the percussion under 
Mercury to the root of the first finger indicates 100 years. The 
shorter the line, the shelter the age that is promised to the 
subject. 

If the line only reaches Mercury finger, the age likely to be 
reached by the suojcct is 25. When it reaches the third finger 
the age likely to be allowed is 50. In this way when the line 
crosses the place under the Saturn finger, the age promised will 
be 75, and if this line reaches the extreme point of the mount 
of Jupiter, the age would be 100. 

The method given above is very popular in India. Even 
an uneducated Hindu tries to estimate tne age of the people 
about him by examining carefully this line of Heart or Life. 
Brahmin astrologers attach very great importance to a careful 
examination of this line. How they tell the length of life of a 
person which in some cases proves to be correct is not easy to 
explain. The rules and methods followed by them are closely 
guarded secrets. To get at the truth there is needed an infinite 
field of research. My own experience of thousands of hands 
tells me that a palmist shoulci not proudly claim to tell the 
length of life one is likely to have, for this is the only point 
and fact in this art of hand reading in which a correct ana un- 
erring prediction is well nigh impossible, although oases have 
been known when palmists possessed of clairvoyance and intui- 
tion predicted the exact length of days one would pass on this 
planet. 

Indian authors have given rules bearing on the reading of 
date of birth from the hand and liave menlioned sixteen kinds 
of the line of Heart or Life. But as these lines are not clearly 
described to enable us to locate them on the hand they are 
not mentioned here, for it would serve no useful purpose to 
do so. This can be elucidated if some Brahmin palmists in 
whose families the knowledge of this art is handed from father 
to son come forward to illustrate them. 

Other Indications. When the line of Heart is crossed by a 
wavy line from the left it indicates that the person would meet 
death by drowning. 

If it is cut by a straight line, it means death from a wound 
caused by a weapon. 

If it is cut by a crooked and wavy line coming from the 
right, there will be danger of death from snake or fire. 

If it is cut by lines coming both from the right and 
the left, it means that the person would die of a deadl}' disease. 

If at the end of the line, i.e. on the mount of Jupiter the 
line is cut by a crooked line, there would be danger of a faU 



THE LINE OF HEART 


93 


from a horse, and if it is dark coloured, the danger would be 
from a donkey. 

If at the commencement of the line there is a hook, it spells 
danger from an elephant. If there are breaks, the danger is 
from water. 

If there are two vertical lines, one small and the other long, 
on the middle of the line, there will be danger of a fall from a 
high place. If there are red spots on any portion of the line, 
they indicate a tendency to boils. 

If there is a dark dot, there is danger from poisoning. 

If the line is crossed in several places by other lines, there 
will be danger from fire or dishonour because of women. 

If this line joins the line of Head, it indicates trouble from 
friends. 

If there is a square between the thumb and the line of 
Life or Pitri Rekha there will be danger of animal bite. 



CHAPTER XV 


LINE OF HEAD AND LINE OF FATE 

fi 

Of all the lines on the hand the line of Head which runs 
through the centre of the palm is considered to be the most 
important, as success or failure in the life of the subject de- 
pends, to a great extent, on the intellectual ability possessed 
by him. It indicates the versatility of his mind. It is also 
indicative of the disease to which his brain is heir. 

For a correct estimate of the psychological tendencies of the 
subject, the student should find out the degree of self-control 
denoted by the line of Head. He should also judge the 
strength of the mount of Moon and line of Head which are 
considered as the source from which all ideas flow, as also 
the shape and size of the thumb, which indicates the ability to 
translate those ideas into practical shape. Besides, the student 
cannot afford to miss a close and careful examination of the 
signs, marks and shape of the line of Head in both the hands, 
as such a course alone would enable him to estimate how far 
the subject has been able to make or mar his career; whether 
he has followed the hereditary tendencies of mind with which 
he was born, or he has changed his mental preoccupations and 
his career. On the right hand of self-made persons, the line 
of Head has been found more powerful, evenly and deeply 
traced than on their left hand. The starting point and termi- 
nation of the line should also be noted. 

Character of the Line. The line to be good must be long, 
deeply traced, pink coloured and neither broad nor thin. It 
should not be thick and broad either. The length of the line 
denotes power of taking in ideas, versatility of the mind, and 
the learning and scholarship of the subject. The depth indi- 
cates concentralion. The wider and broader the line, the less 
concentration the subject possesses; his nature is vacillating and 
changeable.*' Hard-working students have a deep, clean, thin 
and fine looking line of Head. People with a broad and thick 
line of Head are fond of outdoor life and .sport and are averse 
to mental occupation. Shortness of the line denotes an ability 
to take in only few subjects; but people with straight and short 
but deeply cut Head lines prove to be successful business men. 
The student should also bear in mind the softness or otherwise 
tof the palm, for on it depends the amount of physical activity 
n person would be inclined to. deep and clear-cut line of 
Head, if found on a. soft hand, would mean that the subjects 
physical frame would be under the direction of his mind in 
spite of his being a\^erse to work. A short but straight b'ne 
or Head on an elastic and hard p>alm would show that the 





96 


INDIAN PAL>aSl*RY 


person would work hard at routine to the utmost extent, but 
the shortness or width is unfavourable. If, on the other hand, 
the mounts of Jupiter and Mercunr are strong, both the fingers 
being long and conical with the first phalange long and deve- 
loped, the line of Head long and finely traced, the person has 
a great faculty of concentrating his -mind; and if with these 
signs, the mounts of Sun and Saturn are also good, the lo\'e 
of reading is present and the subject would be a fine scholar 
learned in all Kinds of sciences. If it is faintly traced, narrow 
and weak looking, it ueiiutcs a weak intellect and frivolous 
disposition. 

The length of the line and the development of the mount 
of Moon denote the kind of memory a person has. Children 
with short lines of Head should be encouraged to repeat their 
lessons again and again. If the quadrangle, i.e., the space 
between flie lines of Head and Heart is good and normal, it is 
a mark of mental and physical healtli. The straightness of the 
line denotes a grasp or practical ideas, and practical tendency 
of the mind and a certain amount of organizing and adminis- 
trative ability and a love of making money. Its being chained 
is a sign of headaches and weakness of the brain. When it is 
islanded with fluted nails, it is thought to be a mark of 
consumption. 

This line, when seen sloping, denotes imaginative faculties. 
If the line is seen ninning straight for some distance and then 
slightly sloping to the mount of Moon, the practical ability of 
the subject would be harmonized with inventive and original 
faculties. But if the line, after running straight through the 
palm, turns up at the close and points to the Mercury mount, 
it is the sign of a person who, if the finger pf Mercury is also 
long and well set on the palm, would make money and do 
ever>"thing for the sake of profit. If the line is long also, and 
the fingers close set, the person would be of an avaricious dis- 
position. The student should examine the thumb as well in 
order to judge if the indications pointing to a pursuit of wealth 
would bear fruit. All poets have sloping lines of Head and 
strong mounts of Venus and Moon. The straighter the line 
of Head, the more tnithful is the person. Tlie slope of the 
Head line creates in a person a tendency to exaggerate ideas. 
If the Moon mount is very high and the line or Head slopes 
to the Moor it denotes a tendency to tell lies. If the line is seen 
forked, it is said that tfie person would try to derive profit 
from his lies. The line of Heart and thumb must be good to 
prevent a person from resorting to lies. Artists and men of 
creative genius have beautiful sloping lines, and a good mount 
of Moon. Before coming to any conclusion regarding the char- 
acter of a person, all the signs and marks of the liand as a 
whole should be examined. 

Starting Points of the Line of Head 

There are three distinct points from which the line of head 
rises. 



THE LINE OF |1EAD 


97 


(1) from the mount of Mars inside tlie line of Lite (see 
1-5, Figure 17); 

(2) joined to the line of Life (A-A, Figure 19); 

(3) outside the line of Life (see 3-4, Figure 18); 

when the line of Head rises from inside the Life line, it 

is under the malignant influence of the Planet of Mars, and is 
a very unfavourable sign to have. It shows that the person 
has an excessive element of over-sensitiveness, overcaution, tim- 
idity and irritability in his nature. Unless backed up by a 
very stiff and strong t>^ of thumb denoting strength of will 
and healthy logical ability and reasonableness, there is very 
little chance that he would exercise self-control, in the absence 
of which he is apt to resort to actions likely to ruin his career 
and cause trouble to everybody about him. A person with this 
sign is of a brooding nature and magnifles little incidents, and 
is easily put out over trifles. Besides, people of this type are 
very troublesome neighbours and relations. All these unfavour- 
able traits of nature and character are accentuated and become 
all the more unfavourable when the line bends over the mount 
of Moon, as the slope of the line makes the imagination run 
riot to the utter sorrow of the possessor. It is not a matter of 
, wonder that people of this type are led to commit suicide. I 
"have read this tendenc>’ on many hands when the signs above 
described were present. Long, tldn, pointed or conical fingers, 
the girdle of Venus, a long Heart Jine running from the mount 
of Jupiter and curving on the line of Life, and a weak, supple 
thumb; if these are present with this type of line of Head, it 
indicates a troubled and unfortunate existence. A successful 
career as a business man is out of the question, and such people 
in the course of their hfe would be involved in all kinds of 
misfortunes, and with the advance of age there is a likelihood 
of their turning insane. In all such cases the lines of Destiny, 
Sun ^d other ascending lines, as they move up in their course, 
fade out. 

When, however, this line straightens up in its passage 
through the palm and instead of bending towards the mount 
of Moon, runs up to the upper mount of Mars, it denotes that 
by the exercise of will power, intelligence and common sense, 
the subject will develop self-control and overcome his over- 
sensitiveness. In that case it would be possible for*him to live 
in peace with people about him. 

In some cases I have seen this line of Head rising from the 
centre of the mount of Jupiter and after running to the lower 
mount of Mars inside the line of Life coming out, crossing the 
Life line and making for the upper mount of Mars in a clear- 
cut form. Tliis type of line denoted honourable ambitious and 
able persons; but the elements of self-res£>&^ and pride were 
found to be so strong that they were the last persons to beg 
anytliing from anybody however highly placed. On some occa- 



98 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


sions, they felt so injured that they got hot and lost chances 
of material advancement. These indications stood in the path 
of their progress in life and they could not get materially that 
which their talents deserved. If the line of head had not gone 
to the upper mount of Mars, there would not have been self- 
control present in their nature. This 'was due to the malignant 
influence of the planet Mars on their mentality which made 
them nervous, sensitive and overcautious, (see 4-5, Figure 17). 

The Line of Head Joined to the Line of Life: When the 
line of Head is found joined to the line of Life, it denotes a 
highly sensitive, prudent and cautious person who lacks self- 
confidence. Even very able and brilliant persons very often 
underestimate their capabilities and mental powers. 

On the other hand if this line of Head runs straight in its 
course to the mount of Mars, it gives a lot of self-control, prac- 
tical abilit>% determined will and organising and administra- 
tive ability. Peojple with this sign, although nervous and sen- 
sitive, do not give evidence of their being such, ^fhey have 
the courage and determined will to carr>^ out their purpose, 
and use their fighting capacity to the utmost to achieve that 
which appears to them to be right and which tliey feel it is 
their duty to carry out. 

When this line terminates in a fork, one running straight 
to the upper mount of Mars and the other sloping to the 
mount of Moon, the person is both imaginative and practical. 

In such a case, however, there is a lot of indecision between 
the imaginative and practical sides. The reasonable course for 
him is to select the idea that first suggests itself and act upon 
it with advantage. 

When the line of Head has a gentle curve to the mount 
of Moon, it is a very nice sign, as it definitely denotes a dis- 
tinct control of the imagination. On the contrary when this 
line runs to the mount of Moon, there is too much of imagina- 
tion and the subject lacks mental balance and strong common 
sense, and often does things in an irregular and foolish way. 
A morbid imagination and excessive sensitiveness are indicated 
by a line of Head which runs to the mount of Moon and turns 
with a curve as shown in the Figure (see A-M, Figure 19). This 
is a sign which has been interpreted to mean a strong tendency 
to commit suicide or lea^d a life of complete retirement away 
from human beings. 

1 his kind of line should not be confused with that sloping 
line of Head which passes over the upper part of the mount or 
Moon and even goes to the wrist. If such a line is not islanded 
or has no other unfavourable mark piesent on it, it denotes 
that the subject though highly sensitive, cautious, nervous and 
awkward in his manner and of melancholic disposition would 
never go to the length of c-ommitting suicide. It is a fact that 
such people suffer untold hard.ships and mental anguish and 



THE LINE OF HEAD 99 

only when they lead a retired life given to devotion and reli- 
gious practices do they find mental peace. 



TERMINATING POINTS OF THE LINE OF HEAD 

When the line of Head is found tied to the line of Life for 
some distance it denotes hesitation and a diffident tone of mind. 
When this kind of line turns upward towards the line of Heart 
under the mount of Saturn and then coming back resumes its 
course, it shows that the person would be swayed by a blind and 
fatal passion. 

There is one kind of line which is regarded as the best one 
can have. It is when the line of Head rises from the mount 
of Jupiter and slightly touching the line of Life runs straight 
through the palm, evenly and deeply traced and long. Such a 
subject will oe endowed with boundless ambition,* a go-ahead 
spirit, moral and physical courage, energy, uncommon abilities 
or organization and administrative genius, business acumen, ex- 
traordinary determination coupled with reason and sound judg- 
ment. This is a mark of greatness and has been found on the 
hands of mat men and women of the world who possessed 
the inimitSle quality of exercising control over others and the 
tact which fitted them to govern over othei;3 in a way that was 
the least distasteful to them. Besides, this is the sign of a bom 
administrator and dispenser of even-handed justice. People with 
this mark have been able to rise from a low position to a high 



100 


INDI^VN PALMISTRY 


one simply through ability and extraordinary qualities of the 
head, (see Figure 18). 

There is another line similar Jo it but slightly difiFerent. 
This again rises from the Jupiter, and without touching the Life 
line but running very close to it, goes straight through the palm, 
long, deep, evenly traced and well coloured. The characteristics 
above described would be denoted, but with the difiFerence that 
there would be an element of hastiness, impetuosity of action 
and less of tact and diplomacy (see 5-1, Figure 18). 

Line of Head Separated from the Line of Life. The third 
way of the line of Head taking its rise is when it is seen sepa- 
rated from the line of l.ife. There are cases when the distance 
between the two is slight, while in others the distance is wider. 
When the space is not very wide (see 6-7 Figure 17) it is an 
excellent mark to possess, for such a line endows a person with 
an independence of thought, quickness of judgment and a men- 
tal and moral courage so very necessary for struggles in life. 
People with this formation make a great success; if they under- 
take to select a public career, they nave the courage to appear 
before the public and express themselves with ease. In cases 
when this line runs straight to the mount of Mars, it denotes 
that the subject would possess the capacity to become a self-, 
appointed leader of a public movement. If a person has the 
finger of Mercury long and high set, with the second phalange 
wide, strong and long, and a line of Head rising from the 
mount of Jupiter and running straight and long across the palm, 
it is a sign of a clever and successful businessman who even If 
he is born in a poor family would rise to be a millionaire, espe- 
cially when the lines of Fate and Apollo are strong, the former 
in some fonn or other reaching the Jupiter mount. TTiis kind 
of mark I noticed on the hands of several millionaires and 
bankers and business magnates. 

When there is a wide space between the lines of Head 
and Life, it denotes that the subject is rash, foolhardy and impe- 
tuous in all that he does. Tlie elements of prudence and cau- 
tion are sadly wanting and he is apt to lack continuity of pur- 
pose and action. He is extremely erratic and changeable in 
all that he does. His temper is an excitable one, and in the 
event of excessive width between the two lines, the brain is 
subject to excess of flow of blood to it, and mental unbalance 
and sleeplessness are the result. These indications become all 
the more alarming and serious when the line of Head is 
islanded, or broad with breaks and hair lines^ for it is an indi- 
cation of insanity. Besides, this sign denotes that owing to ex- 
citability the subject would have a murderous tendency. 

Termmating Points of the Line. If the student masters 
the indications of tl^e rising and terminating points of this Une 
he would have a correct estimate of the mental equipment of 
the subject, which is far more important in the making of a 
successful career than anything else. We have dealt with the 



THE LINE OF JHEAD 


101 


chief indications of the rising points of this line. Now we turn 
to deal with what the line shows when it terminates. When 
tJie line of Head is short and ends abruptly under the mount of 
Saturn, it is said to denote a short life. 

When it runs to the upper mount of Mars, it shows a re- 
sistent and fighting quality. Besides the subject fights his way 
up, and possesses self-control, and in yidverse circumstances he 
is resigned to the will of God and races the world manfully. 
This sign is indicative of a common-sense view of life and even 
the unfavourable tendencies of a sloping line of Head rising 
from the lower mount of Mars are neutralized. When this line 
before terminating on this mount turns upwards pointing to the 
mount of Mercury, it makes the subject grasping and grabbing. 
Such a person becomes a hard taskmaster, and would make 
moneymaking his chief aim in life. Besides, it is also a sign 
that love of money would increase with age, (see A-A, Figure 
19). 

When the line of Head after running straight through the 
palm and touching the mount of Mars gently slopes down to the 
upper mount of Moon, it denotes that the inventive and imagi- 
native faculties and talents of the person are put to practical 
use. The business side and acqilisitive tendencies though not 
•ruled out will be coupled with powers and talents for inven- 
tion (see A-B). 

The termination of the line of Head on the mount of 
Moon makes a person imaginative. If the mount of Moon is 
well developed and the finger of Mercury long and well set on 
the palm, the subject will be a poet, artist, literary man and a 
scholar of a very high order. Besides, the termination of this 
line with a beautiful fork endows a person with a taste for lite- 
rature and should be considered the mark of a scholar learned 
in all the lores of the East and' the West. 

If this line terminates on tlie lower mount of Moon and is 
associated with either a cross or on island, the subject would 
have little mental balance, and may end himself. 

When the line of Head in its early course through the hand 
sends up branches to the line of Heart, it indicates a thievish 
disposition, and parents should watch their children if this sign 
is present on their hands. (See A-D, Figure 19). 

When this line tenninates on the line of Heavt or sends a 
branch to attack it, it is a sure sign.that the persons calcula- 
tive, grasping and grabbing tendencies would be so much in 
evidence that he would lose all mental balance and in his bid 
to make money would go any length and even allow himself 
to resort to criminal methods. Such a one would stand in risk 
of being convicted. This also shows fixity of purpose for some 
purpose in the pursuit of which he may do anything he is cap- 
able of (See D-D, Figure .20). * * 

When the line or Head is very long and ends at the percus- 
sion, it is not a favourable sign. 



102 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


In rare cases the line of Head runs to the lower mount of 
Moon. When it -does, it gives an excess of imagination. 

The line of Head joined at the start with Life and Heart 
lines said to indicate sudden death. 

When the lines of Head and Heart are seen running toge- 
ther as one line, it denotes a very self-concentrated nature. If 
in such a person the sentimental and intellectual sides are 
united, he would possess greater determination of character and 
persistence of aim than any other, and as such would use aD 
his powers of head and heart to achieve that on which his 
heart is set. People with this sign have been found to be some- 
times successful in life; but it is not a good and happy sign to 
have, as the nature of the person militates against nis pulling 
on well with people about him. Besides, the position of the 
line must be carefully noted. If it occupies the place usually 
filled by the Heart line, it denotes that the emotional and senti- 
mental side of the person would rule; while if the line is found 
low down the palm in the place usually occupied by the Head 
line, the calculative and intellectual tendencies would have the 
upper hand. 

Double Lines of Head, Many ancient authorities consider 
the double lines of Head when clearly and deeply traced on the 
palm as a sign of the inheritance of great wealm or power. But 
our experience of reading of hands tells us that this mark may 
indicate accession of power and wealth. Even when material 
possessions and social position are not inherited, a person with 
this sign attains them l)y virtue of the excellence of his intel- 
lect and mental power. 

These double lines of Head are seen rising from two dis- 
tinct positions, one rising from the line of Life and the other 
higher up from the mount of Jupiter. These positions endow 
a person with the elements of caution, prudence, a go-ahead 
spirit and ambition and a large measure of self-confidence, which 
will enable him to put his ideas into practical shape. Thus the 
result is that an unusual degree of intelligence and mental power 
would be present in the individual. 

. When the line of Head, after it has covered some distance 
on the palm, is split up into two forks, one nmning straight to 
the upper mount of Mars and the other sloping to the mount of 
Moon, it denotes a dual mentality swaying between the imagi- 
native and practical sides. 

Signs and Marks on the Line of Head 

A chained line of Head is a sign of mental weakness con- 
sequent on ill health. An islanded line of Head when it is 
widely separated from tlie line of Life denotes an excessive 
irritability of temper which sometimes becomes uncontrollable, 
resulting in explosipns, mad and rash acts bordering on murder 
and endangering the life of other people. This formation accom- 
panied by a slope to the mount of Moon denotes an unusually 
melancholic disposition inclining the subject to escape from the 



THE LINE OB HEAD 


103 



society of his fellowmen, and in some cases he is led to an 
act of suicide. 

The position of the island on the line of Head has a mean- 
ing of its own and the student should interpret it accordingly. 
As for example, an island under the third finger denotes a 
weakness of eyesight and tendency to blindness. 

Another point which the student should remember is that 
changes in the form of lines rising or dropping from the Head 
lines are noted. These branches at first seen as hair lines deve- 
lop into well-marked, deep lines and denote practical or imagi- 
native tendencies as the lines are straight or sloping. A care- 
ful examination of these lines will reveal the tentjencies, prac- 
tical or otherwise, of the subject at the date the lines are seen 
on the hand. , • 

When at the close, a fine branch of a straight line of Head 
slopes down to the mount of Moon and the lines of Fate and 
Sun are found of good strength denoting prosperous existence, 
it denotes that after the stress and strain of a busy professional, 
official or business career involving use of practical talent, the 
subject would be inclined more and more, •as the years roll by, 
to a cultivation of the im*aginative and philosophical side of ms 
mentality. 



104 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Sign of Cross and Square and Line of Head, A cross is an 
uiifavouralile sign, and if found on any part of the Head line, it 
indicates injury to the brain. If found under Jupiter, the injury 
would be caused as the result of his being proud and dogma- 
tic. Its presence on this line under Saturn denotes thar the 
injuries would be caused by animals, explosions and blows of 
a treacherous nature. Its position under Sun indicates injury to 
the head consequent on sudden falls. If this cross is situated 
under Mercury, it denotes acident due to scientific pursuits 
or experiments of some business of a risky type. 

Squares are marks of preservation and when found on any 
mount or line, they indicate that the person would escape dis- 
aster. When found on the line of Head, unfavourable signs 
enclosed by it would lose all their intensity of mischief. 

A break in the line of Head indicates an accident to the 
head and if found under Saturn might end in death of the 
subject. 

Tlie student is advised to keep in mind the indications of 
the thumb and tips of fingers when reading the line of Head. 
A supple, conic-tipped thumb, conical and pointed fingers, 
indicating impressionability, .impulsiveness and emotionalism, 
may be controlled if a straight line of Head, clear-cut and finely, 
traced, rules the hand. In such a case, prudence, common 
sense, and level headedness wSl act as a balancing wheel to 
the natural inclinations of the subject. On the other hand, if 
there is a sloping line of Head indicating imagination, and is 
coupled with a strong, stiff thumb or square or spatulate fingers, 
the subject would have his imaginative faculties and tendencies 
controlled and put to practical account. A subject with these 
signs may possess inventive and creative talents of a high order 
if the mount of Moon is well developed and the percussion has 
a definite creative curve and i«! seen bulging out. 

Other Indications. When the Head line sends up branches 
to the mount of Jupiter, it indicates success in all undertakings. 
This is the sign of a bom mler of men. If one of these ends 
in a star on the same mount, it is a mark of unusual, unexpected 
success and good fortune in the form of an accession to social 
position, scholastic success, wealth, conferment of honours. In 
the same way, branches from this line to the other mounts 
should be ihterpreted as partaking of the qualities indicated by 
tlie mounts. 

Wlien a branch from the line of Head ascends toward the 
line of Heart, it denotes that the person would have a love 
affair, in the pursuit of which he would be careless and lake 
all sorts of risks. 

Signs on the Line of Head, A white spot on the line is 
considered a sign* of success in the intellectual and literary 
sphere. 

A dark spot indicates a tendency to brain fever. 



THE UNE OF JlEAD 


105 


When it has a bluish spot and is irregular and weak-look- . 
ing, it indicates a disorder of the liver. 

A star on the line is not a good sim and indicates a wound 
on the head. When this star is found conjoined with the line 
of Health, it is sign of weakness of the sexual organs of women 
and is a mark of sterility. * 

A led spot especially when found under the mount ol 
Saturn indicates injuiy to the head. 

Blindness is indicated when there is a circle on the line 
and a cross high upon on the line of Health. 

Line of Head and Hindu Writers. The line of Head is 
called by the Hindu writers as the line indicating wealth and 
material possessions. It is also called the line of mother, Dhan 
Rekha and Viagra Vilas Lila Rekha, i.e., a line denoting that 
the subject would have a lion’s share in the gratification of his 
desires and would lead a life of luxury and comfort. If a sub- 
ject is fortunate he must have the lines of Life, Head and Heart 
very clearly and deeply traced on the palm, and in their natural 
and good positions, as also the four kinds of lines of Fate or 
Urdh Rekhas, starting from the wrist and ascending to the base 
of all the four fingers. Besides, the line of Knowledge which 
.descends from the base of the third to the palm below should 
also be present. But an examination of hundreds of bands has 
revealed that all these eight lines are rarely found on a hand, 
and that is why the bulk of th^ praulation of the world is 
steeped in poverty and miser>^ The more social progress 
comes in ana the more prosperous the people become, the more 
the hands would be found marked with the favourable lines 
referred to above. 

The line of Head or the line of mother or wealth is a very 
important line. It is of eighteen kinds, and it is believed by 
the Hindu writers that die month of birth of a person can 
be found out by a correct reading of diese types. 

If it is beautiful, thick, unbroken, uncrossed by any other 
line, well-coloured, with no unfavourable signs present on it, 
and deeply and clearly traced, it denotes that the subject would 
have material possessions, worldly prosperity and the supreme 
happiness of seeing his mother living to a fairly advanced age. 

(1) If it is unbroken and of proper thickness, it is called 
the line of Mirag Gate and denotes that the person is fortunate 
and happy and possessed of good idQ&. 

(2) It is called the line of Nagi when it is not good and 
favourable. 

(3) It is called Viratka when it appears to rise in its ri^t 
course. This is a sign of poverty. 

It is called Kumidshi when at its termination it is can- 
nectra with other lines. .This kind of line denotes that there 
would be unfavourable results like the loss of wealth and pos- 
sessions and one*s mother, and a weak mental power. 



106 


INDIAN PAI.MISTRY 


(5) When at its start it is joined to some other line it is 
called Kristina Kacha. The loss of mother and a life of poverty 
are indicated. 

(6) When it appears to lift up on the left course it is 
called Subadhr Dehi. This is regarded good and favourable. 

(7) If the line is unbroken and bends upwards in its mid- 
dle course through the palm and later on appears beautiful 
and straight it is called Pansuli, This is the sign of a person 
who is drawn to the other sex and is licentious. This line gives 
ordinary results. 

(8) If the line while running from the start to the middle 
course is seen rising upwards and further on bends down to 
the end, it is called Virat Bhutu This is the sign of a rich man, 
well honoured and respected in society. 

(9) If at the start and termination it is connected with 
other lines, it is called Ananti and denotes unfavourable vibra- 
tion. 

(10) If at che start the line is broken It is called Bansu 
Dharani. Tlie subject would be shortlived. 

(11) If it is broken at its termination, it is called Brahante 
Mati. It shows that the subject would have a doubting mind 
and weakness in mental order. 

(12) If it is broken in die middle, it is called SuskilvatL 

(13) If it is broken at its start, centre and termination, it 
is called Nikrisht. This is an unfavourable sign and shows that 
the subject would be poor and lead a troubled life of poverty. 

(14) If at its start it is united wath a mole it is called 
Saropvatu 

(15) If at its termination, it has a mole it is called TurangL 

(16) If at its centre it has a mole, it is called Matungi. 

(17) If at all the three places it haj* a mole, it is Sayunji. 

(18) It is also named as SarUbhumi. ITie lines Nos. 14th 
to 18th are very favourable, and if found on the hand of a 
person denotes that the subject would be rich, and would 
occupy a good and high social position and fill some high post 
of responsibility and power in the state. He would be wise. 

THE LINE OF DESTINY OB FATE 

Cheiro, the celebrated British pahnist and seer says in his 
book, Palmistry For All, ‘In my own long experience I could 
not help but remark the intimate relation between the effect 
of these great planets of our universe and humanity in general.* 
In another place in the same work he remarks : 

‘That some of the greatest teachers and philosophers have 
come to the conclusion that fate exists for all. Our soul is a 
part of the universal soul which knows all things and through 
the instrumentality of the brain writes its knowledge of the 
future in advance upon the hand. Besides there is nothing in 



THE LINE OF.FATE 


107 


this world of ours which is left to blind chance, and All Know- 
ing and All Seeing Providence through the mysterious laws of 
destiny shapes our ends.” 

Saturn in astrology is associated with fate. He is the 
bringer of evil, the power that precipitates in this life the result 
of deeds and thoughts of our past life. Besides, our fate is 
represented by the planets Saturn and Mars, and lines, i.e., the 
lines of Destiny or Saturn, worry lines coming from the mount 
of Mars inside the line of Life, indicate how we are to undergo 
suiferings as a result of deeds in our previous birth. The evolu- 
tion of the soul is denoted by Moon, and on the hand can be 
seen the strength and weakness of the mount of Moon which 
is the seat of imagination. Unless the stren^h of Saturn, the 
outermost ring of limitation in our life, is broken, the soul can- 
not express to the full its gains from previous lives, and libera- 
tion from the Cycle of births and death is not possible. 

We have seen how the lines of Life, Head and Heart 
show the strength or otherwise of the physical vitality, intelli- 
gence and emotions that we possess. The line of destiny or 
Saturn is the line which denotes the road of destiny on which 
a human being travels, lliis lir|e is rarely found on elemen- 
tary hands, the hands of labourers and people whose interests 
are bound up with the passing hour. Besides, this line is not 
sometimes seen on the hands of very rich people who never 
have to worry about their daily life, of those very selfish people 
of so phlegmatic a nature that tfiey remain absorbed in their 
own hereditary conditions and environments. Students make 
great mistakes in judging the fortune and destiny of a person 
bv only examining the line of Fate which, if found long and 
well marked, is supposed to confer great wealth, social position 
and rank on the possessor. The fact of the matter is that a 
mere possession or this line does not mean that the subject will 
be wealthy and successful in life; for I have seen people with 
long line of Fate occupying unenviable and low positions in 
life, and some of them were found to be extremely poor and 
unfortunate; but most of them in ^ite of failure to achieve 
anything had a feeling of self-satisfaction, and did not appear 
to worry in the least how they led their life, provided they got 
their bread and butter all right. In such cases, the hands were 
invariably found to be unbalanced. The fingers, .thumb and 
mounts were not nonnally developed, and the subjects were 
handicapped by intellectual, emotional and physical defects. 

“The possessor of a long line of Fate”, says Mrs. St. Hill, 
“is always under the rule of circumstances, heredity and of his 
own character. His career is before Him. He can make it 
good or bad. The road is there and along it he goes. ITiis is 
of course if the line is long in both hands. If it is long in one 
and broken in the other* there will be sfruggles against cir- 
cumstances. To have a long line all crossed and barred is a 
greater misfortune than to have no line at all, except in the 



108 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


case of a very strong and peculiar character. To be bom under 
high' and peculiar circumstances and to be gifted with sufficient 
intelligence to be acutely sensible of the fact is far more unfor- 
tunate than to be born to an insignificant existence with an un- 
impressionable temperament, taking little account of circum- 
stances, witliout ambition and contented with the commonplace.” 
The above observations ^are quite coirect. Possessors of a long 
Fate line are under the influence of Saturn and if this line is 
crossed and barred, the malignant influence of Mars is added to 
that ot Saturn, the dispenser of fate, and in tliis case the com- 
l)ined influence of Mars and Saturn makes man undergo suft'er- 
ings and tribulations and take part in struggles and strifes; and by 
tlie time the end comes, tlie destiny is fulfilled. An examination 
of the line of Fate has revealed the fact that if Saturn the 
planet of fate is not favourable to a person, the line of Destiny 
even if long would be crossed and barred by lines from Mars, 
or be wavy and crooked. Besides, in such cases it has also been 
seen to rise from the plain of Mars thus establishing an inti- 
mate relation between Mars and Saturn. These formations 
l^oint to the fact tliat not until the 36th year is passed would the 
subject have his affairs straight, and he woidd have to fight 
toughly against circumstances. His life up to that time would 
be colourless, and there would hardly be any appreciation or 
recognition of the work done and the career adopted by him. 
The line of Fate even if long and straight, unless reinforced 
by the line of Sun, does not promise success and prosperity 
and denotes that life would be commonplace, fatalistic, full of 
sufferings, sorrow and obscurity. As a matter of fact such peo- 
ple are bom in the world to reap the fruits of actions in the 
previous incarnations. 

In order to judge aright how far a good line of Fate would 
promise wealth, honour^ rank and social position to the subject, 
the student should bear in mind the following facts, which if 
not cxinsidered are very likely to create a wrong impression 
regarding the indications of a clear, unbroken and strong line 
of Destiny: 

(1) the palm should be evenly balanced with no distinct 
and marked hollowness. 

(2) the fingers should be normally developed, and straight 
and long, set evenly and in a line on the palm with mounts 
underneath well-developed so as not to cause a slope inclined 
either towards the side of the mount of Mercury or the mount 
of Jupiter. 

(3) The line of Head should be evenly traced, long and 
deep, and should rise from the mount of Jupiter, and slightly 
touching the Life line sweep through the middle of the palm 
to the percussion. * * 

(4) The thumb should show strength of will and healthy 
reasoning powers. 



THE LINE OF EATE 


109 


(5) A line ot Sun without which no success worth the name 
can be predicted should also be present. 

TTie line of Fate is one of the most important of the 
principal lines of the hand, and denote the main events of the 
career of a person, changes^ successes or failures and possibilities 
of the future. On the left hand, it indicates the ideas, opinions 
and the inner life and in the right it denotes the facts connected 
with our outward and active life. Mrs. St. HiU thinks that a 
change of a profession should be read in the right, and that of 
rel^ion in the left. To be favourable, it should be deep, evenly 
and clearly traced, straight and not wavy. It should have 
branches running up to the bases of the fingers of Mercury, 
Sun and Jupiter. A branchless line of Fate even if long and 
strong should not be considered a good line at all. It is fotmd 
on the hands of a person who goes to his doom; and it would 
be extremely hard for him to avoid tragic events in his career. 
Nothing viall ever happen in his life but to cause him suffering; 
and he would stand alone with none to help him. The line, 
if short, denotes a short career; if broken, a change in the 
career; if crooked, an evil life; if barred by cross lines, trouble 
and diflSculties; if islanded, weak financial circumstances; and 
Jf starred, an accident. Besides this line should be read in con- 
nection with the parts of the hand it runs over. 

The line of Destiny has been found to rise from the following 
distinct positions ; — , 

1. From and out of the line of Life. 

2. From the wrist. 

3. From the plain of Mars. 

4. From the mount of Moon. 

1. Rising from the Line of Life (See A-B, Fig. 21). When 
the line of Fate rises from the line of Life, it denotes a Life 
domitiated in earlier years by home influences. The possessor 
of such a line would not be able to start life independently and 
would have to face dfficulties and hard struggles. In spite of 
talents and hard work, he would fail to receive recognition and 
reward for his work. Besides, he would be neglected, set upon 
and definitely discouraged, so that his life would be obscure 
right up to the time the Fate line leaves the Life line. This year 
would be very important in his career; for it would* be from this 
time that his career would become sttecessful, provided his line 
of Fate after this year is well traced, deep and unbroken, run- 
ning to the mount of Saturn and ending there and in its course 
sending branches to other mounts. There is another point worth 
noting and it is that the possessors of such a line cannot break 
away from their family, and wherever they might go and live, 
their interests would be bound up with the family to which they 
belong. Since this kind of line or Fate in its early course through 
the palm is the same as the line of Life, it aenotes that the 
subject would have all the advantages and disadvantages conse- 



110 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


quent on the family environment in which he was bom. If he 
belongs to a rich, family he would lead a comfortable life; but 
there would hardly be any personal success. If he is bom in a 
poor family, his early years will be cramped and difficult, and 
he would have to stmggle hard to make his career. These indi- 
cations regarding his Fate line can odly be explained when we 
bear in mind the fact that ancient Hindu authors on palmistry 
called the line of Life the line of father, family or race. There- 
fore if in the hand we see the lines of Fate coinciding with the 
line of Life from the wrist onward, and mnning up as one line, 
we should interpret this sign to mean that up to the time the 
line of Destiny seems to mn on with the line of Life (as shown 
in ZAB, Figure 21) the subject's life would be entirely mled by 
the social and financial status of the family in which he or she 
has been bom. The life as remarked by some writers on the 
subject need not be hard and cramped in all cases. It has been 
seen that poor people are handicapped and depressed because of 
their weak financial position, while on the other hand, subjects 
bom in richer and more prosperous conditions lead an extremely 
comfortable life and have not to worry in the least; but it is a 
fact that their career is not independent and there is no personal 
success worth the name. Even after their independent career 
is started, they are financed by their parents or receive ^ancial 
help from the property or bank balances of their family. 



Fig. 21 . 


LINE OF FATE AND ITS STARTING PLACaSS 



THE LINE OF FATE 


111 


When the line of Fate rises from inside the line of Life (C D, 
Figure 21) it means that the life would be swayed by passion and 
the destiny would be affected by love of the opposite sex in a 
most unfavourable way. 

2. Rising from the Wrist (E — ^F); Rising from the wrist 
the line of Destiny denotes ‘that the subject would take up an 
early responsibility and would be free tp select arid chalk out a 
career or his own without allowing himself to be dominated and 
influenced by his parents so fai as the choice of the career is 
concerned. If this line is straight, deep, clearly and evenly 
traced and long and runs in a faultless form to the mount of 
Saturn, throwing branches to the other mounts, and supported 
and accompanied by the line of Sun, it promises extremely good 
fortune, brilliant success and attainment of high social position 
and acquisition of wealth. This is the most favourable form of 
the line of Destiny. This kind of line becomes unfavourable 
and indicates grief when it rises from below the rascette. 

3. Rising from the Mount of Moon. When the line of 

Fate rises from the mount of Moon, the destiny is influenced by 
the changeable character of the planet moon. The fate is more 
eventful and capricious and depends on the caprices and fancy 
of other people. • 

* When it joins the line of Heart, it denotes a happy and 
prosperous marriage consequent on some romantic love affair* 
People with this kind of Fate line and fingers have been found 
to be gifted with intuitive powers.* When the line of Fate is 
seen straight in the hand running to the mount of Saturn Mrith a 
line coming from tlie mount of Moon and joining it, it denotes 
that the subject would be helped and pushed up in life by a 
person from outside, and it is generally regardecf that it refers 
to a person of the other sex (R-M, Fimre 21). 

When such a line cuts the line of Fate and runs upwards 
towards the mount of Jupiter, it show's that the person whom 
this line represents would use the subject for his personal gains, 
and then w'hen his object had been achieved he would with- 
draw. Such a sign has been seen on the hands of women (O P, 
Figure 21). 

When a line from Moon travels by the line of Fate, it 
represents a healthy influence through which the subject would 
be aided in life. 

People with Fate lines from Moon have personal magne- 
tism, easily become public favourites jahd achieve good success 
in professions wherein they have a chance to come into contact 
with people. 

4. Rising from the Plain of Mars (R R, Fig. 22). When the 
line of Fate rises from the plain of Mars, a very hard life is 
indicated. Up to the time there is no Fate line on the hand, 
the subject leads a negative existence and*remains unknown. 
With the appearance of the Fate line, provided it is strong 
and well marked and ends on its mount, i.e., Saturn, the circum- 



112 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


stances begin to change, and in accordance with the nature of 
the line, the life led is good or bad. From the very fact that 
the line of Destiny starts from the plain of Mars and ends on 
Saturn, a relation between Saturn and Mars is established. This 



Fig. 22. 

LINE OF FATE 

means that the subject would have to struggle hard to win suc- 
cess in life, and these sufferings 'are accentuated when the 
line of Fate is crossed by worry lines and there are definite 


THEE LINE OF FATE 


113 


marks of opposition or strife. But if this line is uncrossed and 
well marked and reaches the mount of Saturn and becomes 
branched and supported by a line of Sun, success is attained. 

Branches of the Line of Fate. A branchless and heavily 
marked line of Fate is not a favourable sign to have. The best 
line of Fate is one that is deeply, clearly and evenly traced on 
the palm and reaches the mount of Saturn and sends branches 
to the mounts of Mercury, Sun and Jupiter. Sometimes, the 
line of Fate instead of ending on its own, i.e., tlie Saturn mount 
ends on the Mount of Mercury or Sun or Jupiter. It tlien par- 
takes of the qualities of the mount to vvhicm it runs. As for 
example, if the line bends towards the mount of Jupiter, the 
subject would occupy a post of power and responsiblity or 
pursue a prominent business career; if it goes towards sun, a 
prominent public life or success in art, sculpture, painting or 
money making is indicated; if it goes to the mount of Mer- 
cury it is the mark of a prominent scientist and business man 
of great shrewdness. 

'The branches from the line of Fate running to the mounts 
of Jupiter, Sun or Mercury are very favourable to the possessor. 
If the branch reaches the mount of Jupiter, it denotes that the 
ambitions would be realised, and ‘the possessor would occupy 
a post of responsibility and power, and he would attain a high 
social position. This is a .splendid sign to have (See 1 — 2^ No. II, 
Fig. 22). 

If the branch runs towards the mount of Sun, success 
would be won in the direction of public life and wealth, and 
it would bring great fame. Tliis is a magnificent mark of success. 
If the branch goes towards Mercury, it denotes that the subject 
would win .success in science or commerce. (M N & G H, No. II, 
Fig. 22). 

When the line of Fate passing over tlie mount of Saturn 
ascends up into the base of the finger, it is a very unfavourable 
sign to possess, as the subject would attempt too much and he 
would fail to achieve his purpose. 

The line of Destiny stopped by the line of Head denotes 
that the subject would ruin his career by some mental mis- 
calculation or foolishness. Again when this line is stopped by 
the line of Heart, affections misplaced would ruin the career. 
But when this Fate line becomes merged in the Heart line and 
together in a clear form they go up to the mount of Jupiter, 
the h^hest ambitions of the subject Would be realised through 
the aff^ions. He will be helped throughout by the friendship 
and love of the people he comes across. 

Rising from the line of Head, a well marked line of destiny 
denotes success achieved through the mental ability of the 
person. 

A shadowy line of D&tiny, and the one made up of little 
bits, indicates that the life would not be successful. 



114 


]ND1\N PALMISTRY 


A break in the Fate line means change; but the change 
would not be troublesome and unfortunate if the line begins 
before the other ends. If the line after the break is strong in 
its course, it shows that the position would advance, (See BB, 
CC, DD, No. IV, Fig. 22). 

Termination of the Line of Destiny, The line of destiny 
ending on the mount o^^ Saturn indicate a good fate, on the 
mount of Jupiter a celebrated and prominent career, on the 
mount of Sun wealth or fame or both, and on the Mercury 
mount a prominent business or scientific career. The line, if 
stopping at the line of Head, means a fatal false judgment; if 
on tlie line of Heart disappointment in the affections and the 
mining of the career through love. Such a sign sometimes in- 
dicates death from heart failure. (No. N., Ill See Fig. 22) 

Influence Lines. A small line coming from the mount of 
Moon and merging into the line of Fate (See G H No. V. Fig. 
22) denotes marriage at the date when this joins the Fate line. 
But if the line does not join, marriage may not take place; and 
if it is seen mnning side by side, the influence and love would 
be present in the life. This kind of line of influence when cut- 
ting the line of Fate and crossing over to the mount of Mars 
indicates that the love would change to hate to the great detri- 
ment of the career of the persan on whose hand the sign is 
present. 

Double Line of Fate. On certain hands double lines of Fate 
have been found. Sometimes even more than two lines are 
found running up side by side. These lines of Fate, if they 
nin to different mounts, indicate that the two or more kinds 
of careers would mn simultaneously. Of these one or more 
may be either hobbies or side lines, and the strongest and 
longest of tliem may denote the principal career. 

When no line of Fate is seen in the hand, and the line of 
Head is strong and clear, success is likely to be achieved by the 
intellectual ability of the person; but if the lines of Head and 
thumb are v/eak, the life led would be very ordinary, and there 
would be nothing to brighten up the existence. In all the.se 
cases, it would not be possible to name the events of life. 

Signs and Marks on the Line. A star is a bad sign to be 
found on the line of Fate. It blasts the career, and indicates 
that a rich man would be reduced to poverty and great shock 
and trouble would come to him. 

A square is a sign of preserA^ation from trouble and danger 
and points to the fact that the possessor does some work which 
is perilous but would be saved from accident or danger (See 
No, 1, Figure 22). 

An island on t|ie line of Fate is an unfavourable sign. It 
denotes financial difficulties and folly and cheating caused by 
the influence of a person who is unrighteously connected Avitli 
the possessor. Hence it is interpreted to mean an illicit con- 



THE UNE OF FATE 


115 


nection. An island at the termination of the fate line shows 
that the career would end in despair. 

Bar lines from the side of the mount of Mars and Venus 
indicate troubles and di£Bculties. 

Some More Obsetvations Bearding Fate Line. The line 
of Fate if long and well marked denotes the career to be safe, 
and hence it has been found on the Bands of all those people 
who pursue a safe career, such as teachers, civil servants, and 
those landlords and rich mill owners who have big bank ba- 
lances, and who have not to worry as to the kind of career they 
should pursue. Besides, it is also found on the hands of those 
who believe in fate. People who do not believe in fate, hut 
are architects of their own fate, and are materialistic have not 
the Fate line deeply and clearly marked. But they easily suc- 
ceed in life when their palm is evenly balanced and has a 
good line of Head. 

The student should clearly understand that the presence 
of a line of Fate on the hand is a sign that the possessor has a 
marked personality. His road of oestiny lies before him on 
which it would be easier for him to travel than the person who 
has no Fate line in any shape or form. Even on the hands of per- 
sons who do not believe in fate and who make their own career 
I have seen this line of Destiny making its appearance and be- 
coming deeper and deeper as success attenaed their efforts. 

The Line of Destiny Accordir^ to Hindu Writers. All the 
Hindu writers on palmistry emphasize the following lines and 
signs in order to estimate the aestiny of a human being. 

(1) Urdh Rekhas or vertical lines rising from the side of 
the wrist and^ terminating on the mounts of Jupiter, Saturn, 
Sun and Mercury. 

(2) Btiksh Rekha or the line of the tree which is seen on 
the palm when the vertical lines or Urdh Rekhas are full of 
branches. 

(3) The line of the plough or Hal Rekha- This is the line 
whicn starts from the mount of Moon and ends on the line of 
Head as shown in the figure (22 No, III. OP). Besides this 
line. Fate lines rising independently from the wrist or above 
the Head lines have Been seen. This plough line is considered 
as good as a Fate line. 

(4) Mark of fish seen on the wrijt. 

(5) Mark of a crocodile. 

(6) The sign of Kamal or triple fork on the lines of Heart, 
Fate and Sun. 

(7) The sign of a condi seen either on the mount of 
Jupiter or the wrist. What the marks given in 4-5-7 above 
indicate has already been given. The student is referred to 
die relevant chapter. 

Now we mve below the main indications of f7rd% Rekha 
or the line of Fate as treated in works like Hast Saniivani 



116 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


(1) If the line of Fate starting from the wrist ascends 
towaras the thumb, it indicates a ruung prince. 

(2) When this line goes up towards the first finger it shows 
that the person is either a prince or a minister. 

(3) When this line goes up towards the second finger, it 
denotes a person who ij a very famous leader and is some- 
times a general of the army. 

(4) When it goes up towards the third finger it is the 
sign of a wealthy man with horses and carriages. He is also 
a national leader. 

(5) When this line ascends up the palm towards the little 
finger, the person is a big man, very much honoured and res- 
pected in every department of life. 

If this Fate line goes towards all the four fingers, the sub- 
ject would enjoy all sorts of happiness, and occupy a high 
administrative post in civil and army departments. He is a 
very fortunate person. 

Tlie line of Fate is also called line of honour and 
knowledge. 

If this line is unbroken, faultless, well-coloured and marked, 
it indicates all that has been given above. Besides, it makes a 
person learned and honoured and enables him to clothe and 
teed hundreds of human beings. 

In a verse it has been seated that if on the palm of a per- 
son, three lines are found going up towards the fingers from 
the side of the wrist, it is the sign of a prince or Raja who 
enjoys benefits of material possessions, social position and all 
that a human being can desire to possess. So much has been 
stated by the ancient writers of the verse. But I would advise 
the student to interpret the word Raja in a broad sense. The 
three or more vertical or Urdh Rekhas lines may be found on 
the hands of persons who are not ruling princes, but who are 
not less than princes in point of wealth, social position, intel- 
lectual attainments and other facts indicative of celebrities in 
social, political and religious fields. These lines, I am sure, were 
present on the hands of ancient leaders and men and are sure 
to be found on the hands of all famous and top ranking leaders 
today. 



CHAPTEB XVI 


LINE OF SUN 

Tlie line of Sun or fortune or capability or’ success or bril- 
liancy is another very important line found on the palm. 

It is seldom found on the hands of poor people leading a 
life of obscurity. Its possessor is a fortunate person and his 
destiny is not commonplace. It is also a sign of an extraordinary 
character whose career would be distinguished and prominent, 
and who would receive recognition of his work from his 
fellowmen. 

The student should bear in mind that this line of Sun 
indicates luck and with this line persons with poor lines of 
Head and Fate, weak fingers; and thumb have been found to 
achieve better success denied to abler people. 

in most cases, the line of Sun, since it terminates on the 
mount of Sun, denotes a person possessed of a happy and cheer- 
ful disposition who would win success, fame ancf wealtli in life 
by reason of his capability, winsdme manner and personal mag- 
netism. Its possessors need not be masters of art; but they 
certainly have an artistic frame of mind, and would try to 
seek beauty in the surroundings in which they move and live. 
Tliis sign has also been seen on the hands of people who suffered 
great misfortunes in life; but their career was uncommon and 
prominent. 

It should not be supposed that this line is found only on 
the liands of good and great people, as it has been seen on. 
the hands of thieves, robbers and others who have grasping and 
grabbing tendencies and who live on human beings like vul- 
tures and fleece him of their money and possessions. 

In ail cases it has been seen that from the date it appears 
on the hand, life becomes more prosperous and important. 

Only in exceptional cases when hands have uncommon 
marks, signs and lines, and are evenly balanced from all points 
of view, a line of Sun may, as in the case of a Napoleon, Stalin, 
Hitler or Nadirshah indicate a phenomenal rise from an obscure 
position. Generally this line refers to great celebrity and win- 
ning of name among his peers to whatever soci&l stratum he 
or she may belong. Hence the s^Jdent is advised to bear in 
mind the fact of the social status tiiat the subject occupies. On 
the hand of a prince, the line of Succe.ss may mean a kingdom; 
while on the hand of a business man, it may mean a lucky en- 
terprise bringing in money and on the hand of a poor clerk 
it may mean only a lift to a higher place in his oflice. 

The line of Success also indicates financial prosperity which 
may or may not depend on the strength or the merit of the 
possessors. 



118 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Sometimes wealth is inherited or comes through speculation 
or some stroke of luck. In a very few cases this accession to 
fortune may be due to some extraordinary achievement in the 
field of art or literature. 

As regards the growth of the line of Sun, Mrs. St. Hill 
says that one of the greatest peculiarities of the line is 
that it grows both ways,^ upward towards the third finger and 
downwards toward the wist. If it grows downward, it means 
that the subject would exercise his talents to win success; 
and if upwards it indicates that fame or glory or wealth would 
be acquired. These indications I have verified on many hands. 

Charactenstics of the Line of Sun, When the line of Sun 
is deep, well marked, stiaight ana long, running from the wrist 
to the base of the third finger, it is a sure sign that the posses- 
sor is intellectually brilliant and would be famous and wealthy. 
If it is long and uncrossed, wealth and reputation and honour 
would come to the subject. When it is strong and straight on 
the Sun mount, the subject is satisfied that he has ample 
abilities. 

The student should pay attention to the strength of the 
mounts of the hand. 

The mounts of Mercury and Jupiter, with strong, well deve- 
loped and normal fingers, coupled with a deep line of Sun, in- 
dicate a person endowed with extraordinary abilities, intellec- 
tuality, shrewdness and ambition which would enable the pos- 
sessor to achieve great sucbess. A literary man would win 
success and fame, if he has a strong line of Sun with good mounts 
of Venu|^ and Moon, the latter giving creative talents, espe- 
cially when there is a creative curve on the Percussion. On 
the hands of great administrators and famous lords of king- 
doms like Napoleon and Akbar, this line is coupled with a hi^ 
mount of Jupiter on which may be seen a star, triangle and a 
trident. 

Gambling propensities should be read from the hand if the 
line of Head is sloping and the third finger is as long as the 
second. 

Tlie line of Sun loses all its strength and does not promise 
success when there is distinct hollowness in the palm. Such a 
person would be unfit to fight to a finish the battle of life be- 
cause he woi‘.ld be handicapped by a feeling of discouragement 
all through life. Wlien the fingers are twisted and the palm is 
hollow, it is a mark of a bom schemer who would miserably 
fail to use his talent for an evil purpose. 

There is another point which the student should note while 
considering this line. Hands with pointed finger-tips and long- 
ish narrow palms as are usually found in the East, especially 
among the Brahmins of India, do not promise good worldly 
success and wealth, as such people live in a world created by 
their own imagination and scorn to push their way up in life. 



LINE OF SUN 


119 


or to struggle to advance materially and socially. For the 
achievement of brilliant worldly success, a strong thumb, nor- 
mally developed, should be present, coupled with a straight and 
long line of Sun. 

Starting Points. The line of Sun may rise from the lines of 
Fate, Life, Head or Heart,* the mounts or Moon or upper Mars, 
the plain of Mars, and the wrist. ^ 

When the line rises from the line of Fate (CB, No. 1, Fig. 
23), it denotes that from the date the line rises, success would 
begin to be achieved by the subject, and his career would be 
brighter and more prosperous. Success and life in such a case 
would come unexpectedly and in an unusal and suiprising man- 
ner. Some authors state that success would come through ones 
own exertions, but I have found it coming through luck. When 
a line of Fate merges into the line of Sun on the Sun mount, 
it indicates an accession to fortune. 

(2) Rising from the line of Life (RD, No. L Fig. 23), it 
denotes that the success that would be earned would bo extra- 
ordinary and the subject would reach the top of his profes- 
sion. Success in art and literature may also be promised, but 
what I have verified is that from the date it rises from the line 
of Life, the person comes into a* brilliant fortune, i'liis mark 

’has been seen on the hands of lucky and big people. St. Ger- 
maine states that the assistance of the relatives helped the 
achievement of success, but I have not verified it from the 
hands I read. • 

(3) Rising from the line of Head, success will be due to 
the mental ability of the possessor (1-2, No. 1, Fig. 23). 

(4) When the line of Sun starts from the Heart line, there 
is a strong indication that there would be a tendency to have 
a strong liking for art, music or literature. There may be a love 
affair in the fife of the subject which might influence the life. 
Besides, a well marked and deeply traced line indicates self 
sufficiency in old age (3-4, No. 2, Fig. 23). 

(5) Very rarely, the line of Sun is seen starling from the 
wrist and going up to the Sun mount. This kind of line was 
present on the hands of the remarkable French actre.ss Madam 
Sarah Bernhardt. This sign denotes an extraordinary career and 
fortune (A B, No. 2, Fig. 23). 

(6) Rising from the upper mount of Mars, the line de- 
notes that fame and fortune would be* won through the fighting 
qualities of the subject 

(7) If the line of Sun starts from the line of Health, it in- 
dicates that from the date the line takes its start commercial 
talents of the subject would be developed. 

(8) The line of Sun rising from Moon denotes that the suc- 
cess would be achieved through merit. If also indicates that 
the subject would be a phblic favourite, and would be helped 
in his career by people from outside his family and in some 



120 


INDli^N PALMISTRY 


cases people of the opposite sex. Great and distinguished peo- 
ple have this line. The sign also shows accession to fortune 
through business or work connected with countries overseas. 
Moon rules water and success comes to a person through sea 
voyages. It also points to the fact that the subject may inherit 
social position. The mark is found On the hanas of export and 
import business men, bafristers, medical men, political leaders. 
When the line of Head is well marked and sloping to the 




mount of Moon, it^is a sign indicating great success in litera- 
ture, painting and pOetiy. 

Starting from inside the triangle or the plain of Mars and 
ascending to the mount of Sun in a faultless condition, it indi- 


LINE OF SUN 


121 


cates that success would come to the possessor after an ex- ^ 
tremely hard struggle, and through his unaided effort. There * 
would be no element of luck, and fortune or wealth will in no 
case be inherited. If such a line is crossed, islanded wavy or 
unfavourable it denotes serious misfortunes. 

Terminations of the Line. If the line of ^Siin terminates 
in a series of small lines on the mou\^t of Sun, it is a mark of 
failure, the nature of which will be determined by other indi- 
cations. If it terminates towards the mount of Saturn, it de- 
notes that Saturn will give a gloomy character to the career. 

If it ends towards Mercury, the subject would be domi- 
nated by profiteering tendencies even in artistic and literary 
pursuits. If it ends in triple forks, .one terminating on the 
mount of Sun, and the other two on Saturn and Mercury, it de- 
notes great fame and wealth, and since Saturn rules the earth, 
landed property in the shape of house and farm (No. Fig. 23). 

Forked at the termination into wavy lines is an indication 
that the aspirations and ambitions wouicl be hard of realization. 

Forked at the termination into a pointed trident, it indi- 
cates that the possessor would win fame and wealth through 
his own exertions and talents. • 

If at the termination on the mount of Sun, the line is asso- 
ciated with a clear star, it is a sign of brilliant success and un- 
usual fame. But mental peace would not be attained. 

Branches. According to the* Hindu view, main lines be- 
coming branched assume the form of Briksh Rekha or line of 
tree, a sign denoting brilliant fortune, fame and success. When 
the line of Sun has branches, it denotes that the subject would 
make efforts to win success. If the branches are clear and un- * 
crossed they indicate sure success; if irregular, uneven and wavy 
they denote failure of efforts through want of concentrative 
faculties. 

Line of Sun and Its Connection with Other Lines. The 
line of Sun cut by the line of marriage denotes that the reputa- 
tion and position of the subject would be lost through an un- 
suitable matrimonial alliance. When this line of union or 
Marriage or a branch of it merges into the line of Sun, it indi- 
cates that the subject would marry a person of high social posi- 
tion (See R, No. 3, Fig. 23 R). • 

When a line from the mount of*Venus touches the line of 
Sun and does not cut it, success and*money comes to the subject 
through his exertions and also through his own people. (See G, 
No. 3, Fig. 23). 

When the line of Sun is crossed by a line from Venus, loss 
is indicated (See H, No. 3, Fig. 23). A line rising from the 
line of Fate and merging into the line of«Sun indicat(*s acces- 
sion to wealth through lucky partnership or unexpectel success. 
If it cuts the line, failure is the result 



122 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


A line rising from the Health line an3 merging into the 
Snn lines denotes success through the business talents of the 
subject. 

Signs on the Line, Bars that cut the line of Sun horizon- 
tally arc not favourable at all, and should be interpreted to 
indicate loss of position of money, err failure of the career, the 
source from which this happens being traced to the mount from 
which the cross line comes. 

When there is a black dot on the line of Sun where it in- 
lerscf'ts with the line of Heart, danger of blindness is indicated. 

When there is a cross touching the line of Sun towards 
the mount of Mercury it indicates that the subject would be 
deficient in business talents and would not achieve success. If 
it is towards Saturn, it is said to denote a pious bent of mind. 

A cross with the mount of Saturn and Moon abnormally 
and badly developed indicates that the subject would be domi- 
nated by a sort of religious mania. 

A star when found at the end of the line denotes that the 
subject would win success and wealth, but happiness would 
not be his possession. 

An island is an unfavourable sign, and indicates pecuniary 
loss, and loss of reputation so long as it lasts. This sign also 
denotes guilty love, and ruin of career and heavy monctaiy 
losses. 

Some More Observations, already stated Mrs. St. Hill 
has referred to a downward line of Sun denoting chance or 
talents that the posse.ssor may use, but such a line has very 
little significance unless it crosses the line of Heart and is seen 
well traced and deep in which case it has been made to appear 
and grow on the palm in consequence of a careful and persist- 
ent exercise of abilities or utilisation of chances J»fforded. Tbis 
sign I had a chance of noticing on a number of hands whose 
possessors by making use of their talents and chances improved 
their lot in life, and won a success which people of their posi- 
tion and qualifications could not do. 

In connection witli this line of Success which is deeper 
on the mount under the base of the third finger referred to 
above, Hindu authors state that such a line, called the line of 
learning or knowledge, starts from the base of the third finger 
and runs down the hand. This view resembles the one held 
by Mrs. St. Hill, although ^he does not call it the line of learn- 
ing but only says that it refers to a potential line of success 
growing ana becoming deeper on the palm by an exercise of 
talents. 

This line of Sun is called by some a line indicating suc- 
cess in tlie shape pf money and luck in things of apparent 
chance, and not success of a high order, which can only be 
achieved if gOijd and favourable signs are present on the hand. 



LINE OF SUN 


123 


If a good line of Success is accompanied by two deep pa- 
rallel lines on either side of it» untold wealth and fame are 
denoted (See No. 4, Fig. 23). 

If there are lines seen running alongside the line of Sun 
without touching it, legacies are denoted. 

If such a line comes from the mount of Venus and runs 
by the Sun line, legacy coming througjii a relative is indicated. 
\^en the Head line has an upward curve, coupled with a long 
line of Sun, it indicates CTeat love of social position and wealth. 
On a long, narrow hand and a prominently hollow palm, this 
line loses all its importance, as such a hand is lacking in energy 
and hard work. 

Hindu View and the Line of Sun, The Urdh Rekha or 
Vertical line which terminates at the base of the third finger is 
also called Dharm Rekha or line of righteousness and denotes 
wealth, position and material possessions. 

If this line is long, it is a sign of wealth. If it is broken 
or crossed or barred by any other line, it indicates loss of money 
and is the mark of a poor man. 

When it starts from the mount of Sun and is deeper there 
than elsewhere, it denotes that \t is the line of learning or 
Joiowledge and shows that the person is learned. The mount 
of Sun has been called by Hindu writers as Vidya Sthan or the 
place of learning and knowledge. 



CHAPTER XVn 


LINES OF MARRIAGE AND FAMILY 

The line of Marriage is not a principal line. It is consi- 
dered a minor line, but of all the minor lines it should be given 
the greatest importance as it relates to that union of sexes upon 
which the fabric of society is based. The institution of mar- 
riage is very ancient and all wise men of the world in general 
and Hindu teachers of India in particular have sincerely believed 
that there is a time set apart in our life so that marriage between 
man and woman is predestined, and will come about in accord- 
ance with the laws regulating our lives in this birth. There are 
authors who call the line of Marriage the line of attachment, 
meaning thereby a fairly long and important connection between 
a man and a woman. In the eyes of God or Nature such a con- 
nection even if not sanctioned by society or sanctified by ritual 
is equal to marriage and should be regarded as such. A line 
of Marriage has nothing to do with liaisons, amours, and all 
those affairs of the heart which are read from other signs and 
marks found in the hand. • 

Some European authors think that it is difficult to deter- 
mine with certainty whether the ceremony of marriage has been 
or will be performed. The^ think that a palmist can be accu- 
rate if he has a long experience of reading hands and is en- 
dowed with intuitive faculties. On the other hand, Hindu 
Palmists believe that it is not at all difficult to name the year 
of marriage. My own experiences of reading thousands of In- 
dian hands tells me that marks, lines and signs so extensively 
and carefully given by European authors are very rarely found on 
Indian hands. Curious signs and marks indicating marriage and 
relating to events consequent on it are not found on most hands 
on which the lines on Mercury mount are clearly marked. On 
the hands pf Hindus sign of divorce have seldom been seen, 
and in some cases have been found signs indicating judicial 
separation or cutting off of a long connection or marriage. But 
such cases are rare. One more point should be borne in mind 
by the student, and it is that the mounts on the hand should be 
carefully examined so that a fairly accurate judgment regarding 
marriage and the time *of its taking place may be made. The 
predominance of certain planets on the hand incline the subject 
to an earlier matrimony than others. A fairly clear knowledge 
of astrology regarding the planets and their influence on the 
life of human beings will help the student to clear up mysteries 
of matrimony wliich he finds difficult to unravel by only exa- 
mining the marka* .and signs of the band. 

There are four places in the h^nd from which marriage is 
read, (i) The mount of Mercury on which lines are found run- 



LINE OF MARRUGE 


125 


Bing parallel to the line of Heart, (ii) Lines rising from the 
line of Life and running down the mount of Venus, (iii) A cross 
on the mount of Jupiter, (iv) Line coming ‘from the mount of 
Moon, and touching the line of Fate. This should not cut it 
and should not in any place be crossed. 

If none of the above lines and signs is found on the hand 
at the time the hand is examined, the palmist should not say 
that marriags would not take place. He should only state that 
there is no sign of marriage at present. It is a fact that lines 
grow on the hand; and it would oe cmel to tell a young person 
that he or she is not destined to marry. 

Lines on the Mount of Mercury. All palmists in India at- 
tach very great importance to the lines on the mount of Mer- 
cury which run parallel to the line of Heart. 

(1) A straight and clear line denotes a happy union, and 

g ersons with such a line are fortunate; as Cheiro, the celebrated 
ritish Palmist puts it, they draw a lucky number in the lottery 
of hearts, and are to be congratulated upon their good fortune. 
My experience of reading a Targe number of hands in all walks 
of life tells me that in this world true marital happiness is a 
rarity. I very seldom found domestic happiness imprinted on 
the hands of persons and naturally came to the conclusion that 
marriage is a lottery of hearts and very few persons draw a 
lucky number and lead a life of domestic peace. 

(2) When the line curves down on the line of Heart, it is 
a sure sign of the loss of the marriage partner (see Fig. 24). 

(3) If the line of Marriage is forked at the end on the 
inside of the mount it denotes separation and not divorce. This 
mark has been noticed by all readers of the hand, and I have 
found it alv/ays to mean an unhappy union ultimately ending 
in separation. On the hands of a woman I found the line or 
Marriage forked, and at the age of forty-three a line was seen 
crossing from the line of Heart to the line of Head cutting 
through the line of Fate. Her first toe next to the big toe was 
longer. All these signs denoted an unhappy marriage and exactly 
when she was forty-three years of age her husband separated 
from her (see Fig. 24, 1^. When this kind of fork is seen out- 
side, it denotes that difficulties and delays would prevent the 
union (see Fig. 25, D). If the line of Marriage curves down- 
ward in a fork with a line crossing over towards the mount 
of Venus, it indicates that the person 6n whose hand this sign is 
found would be divorced (see Fig. 25, G.) If the line of mar- 
riage cuts through the line of Sun, it is a mark denoting that 
the marriage would cause loss of position and wealth (see Fig. 
25). 

If the line of Marriage is forked at the termination with a 
line from it running to the line of Heart 'and bending down- 
ward, it is a sign of an tmhappy marriage ending disastrously 
through the cruelty and haroheartedness of the person on 
whose hand this mark is found (see Fig. 24 N). When a line 



126 


INDJAN PALMISTRY 


rising from the line of Marriage runs downward and merges 
into the line of Head it means that consequent on difiFerences in 
ideas and views, particularly religious, the marriage would end 
unhappily (see Fig. 24, R). 

The line of Marriage when islanded at the termination with 
drooping line denotes that the marriage Would end in disaster 
and death of the partner on account of either severe illness or 
some sort of misfortune. 

The line of Marriage, if it touches or merges into the line 
of Sun, indicates that wealth and fortune would come to the 
subject through marriage. This is the sign of a person who 
marries some rich and famous person. The wife of Lord Cur- 
zon, one of the Viceroys of India, had this sign on her hand. 
She was an American lady and by her marriage with Lord 
Curzon became the Vicereine of India (see Fig. 24, B). 

A very bad and unfortunate sign is the one when the line 
of Marriage is forked at the end and a line from it becomes 
islanded while touching the line of Sun, for it indicates that the 
marriage would end in dis^ace and loss of position and name 
(see Fig. 24, E). When the line of Marriage begins with an 
island it shows that there was seduction before marriage (see 
Fig. 24, F). 

When the line of Marriage is short, and is seen curving up- 
ward, it is a sure sign that marriage would never take place 
(see Fig. 24, P). 



LINES OF MARRUGE 



LINE OF MARI^AGE 


127 


'pie student should note that the lines and indications 
regarding marriage given above are not exhaustive, 'fhere are 
infinite variations found on the hands, and as no two hands are 
alike he is advised to interpret the marks and signs in accord- 
ance with general principles discussed in this book elsewhere. 
One thing more. On som6 hand the student will find several 
marriage lines on the mount of Mercury, without the subjects 
ever going into matrimony. In view of this fact some aumors 
have called it the line of attachment, meaning thereby that the 
subject would enter into intimate connections with persons of 
the opposite sex. In some cases I found them to be mere men- 
tal unions without physical connections. The love affairs were 
there, but they ended neither in marriage nor liaisons. There 
was only affectionate attachment and love. But this happened 
very rarely, and the student should not invariably interpret it 
jis a marriage or liaison. For the edification of tlie student I 
state one more fact which I have verified after an examination 
of thousands of hands in India; and it is that marriage on Indian 
hands is indicated on the mount of Mercury. On very few 
hands have the marriage signs usually found on European and 
American hands been seen. This fact leads me to the con- 
clusion that signs and marks on a hand are in accordance with 
the social customs and modes of life prevailing in the country 
inhabited by the subject whose hand is under examination. It 
is therefore but proper for the palmist to bear this fact in mind, 
and use his intelligence to interpret the lines and signs accord- 
ingly. 

Lines on the Mount of Moon, 'There are influence lines 
rising from the mount of Moon and running towards the line 
of Fate. If the line joins die line of Fate, and this sim is 
equally strong in both hands, it is a mark of an influence eff the 
opposite sex; and if the line of Fate looks stronger, the line is 
favourable and tends to strengthen fate. This sign is generally 
considered a mark denoting marriage. But in some hands I 
read in it an influence of an outside person. In the hand of an 
eye surgeon this mark did not denote marriage, but it referred 
to the influence of a ruling prince who was instrumental in send- 
ing him abroad to undergo professional training. 

When these influence lines from Moon are barred, islanded 
or broken, they denote bad influences and bring ill-luck and 
misfortune to the possessors (Fig. 24, TS & C). 

Influence Lines of the Mount of Venus (see Fig. 24, R). 
On a well-marked hand may be seen influence lines upon the 
mount of Venus. 'These influences, if and when they rise from 
the line of Life and run close to it towards the mount of Venus 
should be interpreted to mean a very close influence of a per- 
son of the opposite sex. According to some writers, marriage 
cannot be premeted, if the line on Mercury mount is not joined 
to the influence line by a line. If this connecting line is island- 



128 


INDIAN PALMISTBY 


ed and the Fate line has also an island, it is a sign denoting 
that the subject had an unfortunate affairs before marriage. 

When the line of influence after its rise from the T^ife line 
moves away towards the mount of Venus, it denotes that the 
influence of the opposite sex to which it refers would grow 
weaker and weaker till it will fade out altogether (see Y N, 
Fig. 24). On the other Aand if this influence line runs closer 
and parallel to the line of Life, it denotes that the person to 
whom it refers would continue to figure in the life of tne person 
so long as the influence lasts. 

When the influence line is barred or starred, or breaks in its 
course, it denotes some mishap to the influence. These marks 



Fig. 25. 

LINES OF MARRIAGE 



LINE OF MARl^GE 


129 


in most cases denote the death of the person to whom the in- 
fluence refers. It also refers to a serious illness or accident to 
him or her (see Fig. 24, O P). 

Some More Observations. Mrs. St. Hill says, ‘^Mercury 
lines are found on the hands of maity persons, yet so many 
remain unmarried. Again there are several of theje lines present 
on hands and most people are married but once. So these 
lines are attachment lines and show attachment of individual 
persons of the opposite sex, serious love affairs, the courses of 
which can be judged by the deviations of the lines. The lines 
of Marriage are tonnd on Luna and by taking them together 
with lines on Mercury we can come to very accurate conclu- 
sions on this important point.** 

These observations of the c'elebraled palmist and authoress 
are very weighty and contain a lot of truth and fact. It is a fact 
so often veriiied that sometimes more than one line has been 
seen on some hands, but the persons married only once and in 
some other cases even the presence of these lines did not bring 
about marriage. These facts lead to the 0*000105100 tliat we 
should try to examine other parts of the hands in order to find 
out if the marriage would come off. These portions of the palm 
are the mounts of Luna and Venus, lines on which indicate the 
^vent of marriage. On the basis of my experience, I can say 
that a palmist should not disregard any sign or line, and he 
should examine carefully lines of attachment of Mercury, and 
lines of influence on Moon and Venus as well. Ihe line on 
Mercury should be fairly long, clear, well traced and should 
reach tne centre of the mount. Shorter lines do not indicate 
marriage, they indicate only an influence of the opposite sex 
which will not bring about a permanent connection. These 
lines on Mercury do not fade ana should be regarded as perma- 
nent lines, 'fhey should be read on both the hands. 

Lines lying nearer the Heart line indicate marriage before 
the 21st year, and if this line is found in the centre of the 
mount the marriage would take place by the 32nd year. Be- 
yond the centre of the mount, the existence of a line denotes 
a connection late in life. 

Widowhood, The following signs denote widowhood on 
the hands of a woman (see Fig. 26): — 

1. The line of Marriage on Mercury dropping«to the line 
of Heart (see 1, Fig. 26). 

2. A black spot on the line (see Fig. 26). 

3. If the line is* drooping and a cross is found at the point 
where drooping ends. 

4 The line of influence on Venus associated with a star 
(see 4, Fig. 26). 

5. A small bar cutting across the line of influence (see 5, 

6. from the Heart line crossing the Fate line and 
ending on the line of Head (see 6, rig. 26). 



ISO 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


7. The line of Fate broken, but this sign must be accom- 
panied with one of the marks given above. 

If the signs and lines given are found on the hands of a 
man, they denote the death of his marriage partner. 

Observations on Marriage by Indian Palmists. According 
to Hindu writers marriage is indicated by signs and lines on two 
portions of the palm. ^ 

1. On the mount of Mercury between the base of the little 
finger and the line of Heart called line of Life by Hindu writers. 

2. Tlie second portion lies between the line of Heart and 
the "'bracelets. With regard to the first, it has been said that 
the number of marriages is indicated by long, unbroken, well 
coloured and beautiful lines. If these lines between are crossed 
or small they denote that there would be a short and troubled 
married life. 

As regards the second, it is written in Shit; Sarnudrik that 
as marw marriages are indicated as there are clearly traced and 
marked lines between the line of Heart and bracelets. These 
lines appear to be those referred to as lines from Luna towards 
the Fate line by European writers. 

If the line of Marriage on the right hand of a woman 
droops down and cuts through the line of Life or Heart it is a 
sign of widowhood. 




LINE OF MABRIAGE 


131 


If the Marriage lines on the mount of Mercury are clear 
cut, unbroken ana well-coloured, they denote on the hands of 
men and women good health and straight conduct and blame* 
less character. If the lines are short and broken the character 
of the women denoted by^them would be questionable. 

</fhe student should note that marriages on the hands of a 
man are to be read from his left hand^nd on that of a woman 
from her right palm. If in a man^ hand the line has a branch 
on the right sidfe of it, he would enjoy the happiness of leading 
a good married life and if branched towards the left side, there 
would be a troubled married life (See B, Fig. 24). 

The Line Inimical to Marriage, On the base of the first 
finger may be seen a cross or horizontal line called the Diksha 
Rekha or line of renunciation. It denotes* that the person 
would renounce the world and turn a Sadhu or monk or nun. 
If such a line is clearly marked and traced on the hand and is 
also accompanied with well marked lines of Maniage, it shows 
that in spite of the presence of marriage marks the marriage of 
the person would never take place. Tliis line is inimical to 
marriage (GH, Fig. 28). 

The lines of marriage on the liands of monks indicate such 
devotees, disciples and missions as are dear to them, and on 
that of nuns, spiritual illumination, pilgrimage and self-mortifi- 
cation. The number of devotees, missions or acts of pilgrimage 
and self-mortification will be in acdbrdance with the number of 
lines found. 

Line Indicating Co-wife. In Asia the system of polygamy 
has pervaded from ancient times and to have more than one 
wife was never considered illegal or unrecognized by society. 
It was sanctibned by religious authorities, and Maharaja Das- 
rath the father of Sri Rama, the great Avatar or incarnation of 
Cod Vishnu, had three queens. As already stated elsewhere, 
lines on the hands of human beings are found in accordance 
with the social customs prevailing among them and should be 
borne in mind while reacfing hands. Hence it is not a matter of 
surprise that Indian authors have referred to signs indicating a 
co-wife. 

On the right hand of a woman should be read the presence 
of another woman who would be the jco-wafe of her husband. 
This sign is found on the line of union under Mercury, the 
branches rising from which would indicate the number who 
would share with her the love and attention of her husband. 
Besides, the Ayu Rekha, or line of Heart if branched under 
Mercury indicates the same fact. In the same verse it is stated 
%at the fortune of the husband should be read from the right 

/knd of the woman (M, Fig. 28). 

» 

So much may be read from the hands of a woman. On a 
. lan's hand will oe found more than one line of union on the 



132 


INDIAN PALMISTBY 


mount of Mercur>', and I have found them to mean more than 
one wife. 

Indian authors refer to some lines on the hands of men 
and women which indicate illicit connections. From the base 
of the thumb on the mount of Venus on a man's hand cross 
lines running .toward the line of Life indicate the number of 
women with whom he would have illicit connection. Similarly 
such lines on the hands of a woman indicate the number of 
men a woman would enjoy. If these lines are inclined towards 
the right side, they indicate «rl friends. The same verse also 
says that at the base of the thumb are to be read the brother 
of the husband [see U B (RN), Fig. 28]. 

On the basis of my experience I would advise the student 
not to blindly interpret these lines and signs to mean actual il- 
licit connections. Much depends on the character indicated by 
other marks and signs of the hand. On the hands of saints who 
renounce the world these lines and signs will be found, but 
it would be wrong and cruel to say that they are morally cor- 
rupt. Ordinarily these lines may be interpreted to mean the 
same as indicated above. 



THE HAND OF A WOMAN WHO WOULD iNOT BECOME 
A V IDOW 

« 

Some More Observations, Indian authors state that if you 
want to know' about a woman s husband, and his relations, 
children and fate, you should examine carefully her right hand. 



133 


LINE OF MABHI&CE 

The Ayu Rekha or Heac^ line on it would give you information 
regarding her husHknd, the line of Head or Matri Rekha or 
Dnan Rekha would say something about the mother of the 
husband and the line of Life or Pitri or Qotra Rekha, about 
the father. The right hand of a woman as already stated tells 
us something about the co-wives of her husband. When the 
line of Heart is found having branchy running in an upward 
direction, there would be great love between husband and 
wife. 

From the left hand of a man, we can read the lines of 
Head, and Life giving information regarding the mother and 
Father of his wife. 

Marks of a Woman Who Would not Outlive Her Husband, 
[n India every woman dreads the death of her husband, and 
the first question that she asks the palmist is whether she would 
l^iave the good fortune of not outliving her husband, and that is 
why in the month of Kartik before the festival of Diwali she 
ceeps a fast for a day so that the life of her husband may be 
engthened, Indian writers have given indications of a woman 
whose husband would outliv^e her, and they are given below. 

The hands of such a woman %re soft and beautiful with the 
ingers small, well-formed and straight. The lines on such 
lands are not many and are definitely pink-coloured,' thin, deep 
ind clearly traced. The marks of a fish, swastik and lotus are 
generally found. The line of Fate^ is long and faultless without 
ireaks, islands and other unfavourable signs on it, Tlie centre 
)f the palm is high and there is no hollowness. There is pre- 
sent the Yav Rekha on the centre of the thumb and its joint. 
The fingers if joined show no chinks in between them. The 
lails are found and well-coloured. The back of the hand is 
lairless. The line of heart has a trident attached to it on the 
mount of Jupiter (see Fig. 27). 

The Marks of a Widow. The following are the marks 
Found on the hand of a woman who would outlive her husband 
and become a widow. 

The marks of widowhood as indicated elsewhere are found. 
The lines have breaks and are red coloured and are numerous. 
The line of Fate is broken. The fingers have more than three 
phalanges. Besides these signs, it has been stated that such a 
woman has a longish, yellow coloured face with shoulders like a 
bullock’s, long abdomen and breasts,, the latter hanging deep 
down. Her body is fat and clumsy.* 

The Choice of Life Partner. From times immemorial the 
institution of marriage has existed, and with the advance of 
civilisation and well-ordered living its importance went on in- 
creasing and there is hardly any country where relations bet- 
ween the sexes are not regulated by some sort of marriage 
customs. As these customs are not tne same or similar every- 
where lines and signs indicative of marriage differ gready. 
People all over die world go into matrimony in accordance wim 



134 


INDIrlN PALMISTRY 



1. Line standing in the way of marriage K — G. 

2. Lines indicating Concubines R — N & U — 

3. Co-wife M. 

their own tendencies and prejudices or monetary, social and 
other economic considerations, and ver>'^ few of them pause to 
consider the advisability or otherwise of entering the holy bonds 
of marriage and the principles which should govern the selec- 
tion of the life partner. Marriages have, therefore, become a 
lottery and few enjoy perfect domc^stic bliss. In my long prac- 
tice of palmistry extending over 20 years, I have very seldom 
read matrimonial bliss imprinted on hands. This, I am sure, is 
due to the fact that wrong persons came together, with the 
result that owing to constant irritation and friction, loss of tem- 
per, self-control and paticnc.^, disagreements between the hus- 
band and \vife made a mockery of the marriage. 

The question arises. It is possible to avoid all this trouble? 
Yes, it is possible if a serious use of the science of palmistry 
is made in the selection of life partners. Undoubtedlv this 
much maligned science can help us to read aright the facts 
about our real self, i.e., o!ir temperament, moral, physical and 
intellectual tendencies. If this is done, we can easily select 
those persons as pui life partners who would exercise a 
counteracting influence and make \ise of powers very likely 
to act as a corrective to our weakness, and to help us in the 
evolution and cultivation of the best of our powers and nature. 



LINE OF MAiyEUAGE 


135 


Besides, it will enable us to have a healthy and lenient view, 
of human nature and to feel that man is not perfect and his 
failings and faults are excusable. 

Some Indications of Mental and Moral Tendencies to be 
Read in the Hands of Men and Their Use m Marriage. There 
are men whose hands show characteristics which are inimical 
to the happiness of their wives. B^it it should be borne in 
mind that no single sign is enough to enable us to arrive at a 
correct judgment. One unfavourable tendency may be neu- 
tralized by other healthy characteristics. Before contracting 
a matrimonial alliance, a woman or her relatives would do well 
to obtain the expert opinion of a palmist as to the suitability 
or otherwise of a young man. The palmist should carefully as- 
certain the physical, moral and intellectual tendencies, social 
aspirations and material ambitions of the suitor. All these facts 
could be easily ascertained if the hand is carefully read and 
examined. In the light of this examination as also by a compa- 
rison with the indications read from the hands of the woman 
sought after, it would be possible for him to state if the mar- 
riage between the two would be suitable and succeed. 

Now a few points as indicated by the hands of men are 
de^It with. A man is passionate, casually disposed, with no 
honourable nature, sense of duty and very little spirit of self- 
sacrifice if the index finger is low set, short, crooked and candle 
like, the line of Heart short and branchless, the thumb with a 
heavy first plialange and undeveloped second and the mounts 
of Moon and Venus exaggerated. Marriage with such a man 
would be troublesome and if is advisable that it should be 
avoided. 

A man with a weak-looking, short thumb, weak mount of 
Mars and a line of Intemperance, with a flabby palm and an 
overdeveloped mount of Moon is a born drunkard whom it 
would be difficult to reform. 

if a man lias a thumb, the first phalange of which is long 
and broad and the joint over-developed and heavy, with the 
first finger long, the mount of Jupiter high, Moon and Venus 
depressed, and the line of Head separate from the line of Life, 
he is domineering and tyrannical, fond of ruling in an obsti- 
nate way. Reasons or arguments whteh run counter to his opi- 
nions would not appeal to him. Owing to the mwints of Venus 
and Moon being depressed, he would Jiave very little imagination 
and sympathy and would ride rough-shod over the opinions 
and feeling of the woman who unfortunately binds herself to 
him. His temper and nature are not such as to make any 
woman happy. A very unfortunate man, with no fighting capa- 
city and will power to push his way up in life, no drive and 
good sense to avail himself of chances in life, a peaceful tem- 
perament and indolent nature, has a ySry poorly developed 
thumb, low-set and short finger of Mercury, fingers unevenly 
set on the palm, a long and weak sloping line of Head, the 



136 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 



L Fish, 2. Good Fate line. 3. Good Sun line. 4. Good Head line. 
5. Star on Jupiter. 6. Trident. 7, .Cross. 8. Sign Showing Sons. 9. 
Island on Centre of thumb. 10» Line of Mars. 11. Line of Heart forked. 
12. Mark of Temple. 

mounts of Mars weak, the centre of the palm having a definite 
hollowness, and the lines of Fate and Sun not well-marked. If 
married, the result would be that his wife would not be happy, 
for he would prove to be a good-for-nothing fellow with no 
strength and will power to fight the battle of life. If a man has 
the Heart and Head lines lying close together indicating nar- 
row-mindedness, a narrow palm showing irritability and discon- 
tentedness, and long, pointed fingers denoting emotionalism, it 
is a mark that the person would be a source of gi*eat annoy- 
ance to the members of his family in whose affairs he would 
interfere a g9od deal. His absence from home would be re- 
ceived by everybody' with ^ a sigh of relief. 

Marks and Signs of a Good and Ideal Husband. A good 
and kind husband, who would make heaven of his home and 
spread happiness and affection around him, should have a long 
line of Heart, with one branch going between the first and se- 
cond fingers and the second rising to the mount of Jupiter. This 
mark would make him affectionate, idealistic and honourable 
in matters of affectioh. He would have constancy and would 
be able to pull on with even difficult people in life. The finger 
of Jupiter snould be straight and long. Tne thumb should have 


LINE OF MARRIAGE 


137 


all the three phalanges evenly balanced and developed. The 
mounts of Venus and Luna should be normally developed, as 
they will give him sympathy, love, generosity and a desire to 
win other's hearts. A clear and deep line of Head, straight in 
most of its course and slightly sloping, would give him self- 
control, a level-headed disposition and good sen^e in domestic 
and other affairs. The fingers should be evenly set on the 
palm, and if the finger of Mercury is straight, long and well- 
set, it will indicate a lot of mental ability, nice judgment and 
ability to push his way up in life. His success in the world 
would be assured. Good health is indicated if the palm is 
broad, the lines of Head, Heart, Life and Health well-marked, 
and no criss-cross lines present. If the line of Health is absent, 
it will be a sign of a healthy nervous system. Besides, an ideal 
and good husband sliould have marks indicating worldly success 
and good fortune, and these are indicated by strong lines ol Fate 
and Sun and lines of Success rising from the line of Life and run- 
ning towards the mounts of Jupiter, Sabirn and Sun. 

The marks of a trident, star and cross on Jupiter, and of 
a fish, flag, temple and of conch should also be present in some 
shape or other. 

Marks and Sif^ns Favourable* or Otherwise Found on a 
'Woman's Hand. Tlie face of person may lead a man astray, 
but the hand never. Women have strong powers of dissimula- 
tion and it is not possible for us to know their real nature easily 
even if we have a chance to come into close contact with them. 
Rut a sound knov/ledge of palmistry would enable us to have 
a clear grasp of the real natufe of the woman we want to 
marry, and in so doing we would be able to avoid an ill-assorted 
alliance and so ensure our domestic happiness. 

Marks of a Helpful Wife. Tfie fingers of a helpful wife 
are conical spatulate, straight and clastic and the mounts are 
normally developed. The Heart line is long, reaching the mount 
of Jupiter, branched or forked. Tlie Mercury finger is pointed. 
The line of Head is straight or .slightly sloping. The Jupiter 
lines are not in evidence and the line of Head is weak, other- 
wise such a person would be indicated as would make the 
life of the person she marries impossible. With these signs the 

E alm should not be narrow, other%vise it would be difficult for 
er to pull on with people around her. All these ^signs go to 
indicate a woman who would be honest, tactful, adaptable, and 
affectionate in disposition, useful anc^ fefined in feelings. 

Marks of a Learned Wife. If the fingers are long with the 
first and fourth fingers having pointed or conic tips and the 
second and third having a square and spatulate formation, the 
palm evenly set on the hand, the line of Heart clear-cut, deep 
and straight with a slight slope, the mounts of Venus, Moon and 
Mercury normally developed, and the line* of Sun deep and 
clear-cut on the mount of Sun and seen running down the palm, 
the woman would prove to be a sensible person with an intel- 
lectual bent of mind. 



138 


INDUN PAIJ^STRY 


Signs of the Attractive Wife Fitted to Sparkle in Society 
and ' Home. If the hands of the woman are small and beanti* 
fully shaped, with the mounts and fingers of Mercuiy and 
Apollo normally developed and the mount of Jupiter, wnich is 
the mount of society, and also Venus prominent but not over- 
developed, she possesses the qualities of shining in society and 
is very likely to nave beauty of face and form. By virtue of her 
winning personality she would have a great influence over her 
husband. If the palm does not have a strong thumb, a straight 
line of Head showing self-control and the line of Heart forked 
and clearly traced on to the centre or base of Jupiter, she would 
prove -a source of trouble and worry to her life-partner, espe- 
cially when they fall on evil times. 

Marks of a Woman Who Would be a Good House-keeper. 
If a woman has a firm hand with spatulate fingers of which the 
third phalange is thick and the second and third joints Jknotted, 
it shows that she would be a sound house-keeper. She would 
carry on everything in an energetic, methodical and painstaking 
manner. She would be an excellent cook, but she will not 
cherish beautiful ideas and thoughts. 

Marks of a Clever Woman Masterful in Temper and Nature. 
If a woman has a large and' firm hand with square fingers set 
wide apart, the finger of Jupiter and its mount highly deve- 
loped, the Heart line short, the Head line straight and clear 
cut, the thumb large and heavy, she would have very little 
sympathy and kindness in h^r character. She would be haughty 
and masterful in temper and would be clever and every one 
about her would disl^e her disagreeable manners. The man 
who marries her would be disappointed as he would fail to 
find anything womanly in her. 

Marks of a Fortunate and Good Woman. The following 
signs and marks are found on the hands of a fortunate woman. 

The rascettes are well traced and well marked. 

The line of Head should be joined to the line of Life but 
run straight through the palm. If it is slightlv sloping, it is 
not unfavourable. But if this line is weak looKing wim lines 
rising to the Jupiter mount and the thumb weak, the woman 
would have little self-control and would be fond of domineer- 
ing over her family and this nature of hers would make the 
life of the husband unpleasant and impossible. 

The line of Fate rising straight from the wrist and ending 
on the mount of Saturn, ‘^e line should have branches. 

The line of Heart branching and risihg to the mount of 
Jupiter. 

The line of Sun clear and well-marked. 

The line of Life clear-cut, deep and well marked, encir- 
cling the mount of .Venus and making it look broad and wide. 

She would have the mark of aq island on the joint of the 
thumb and its centre. These signs indicate that she would have 
children and wealth. 



LINE OF MARBIAGE 


139 


The mark of a fish on the wrist is a very good sign to have 
on the hand, as it indicates that she would have everything in 
the shape of children, husband, wealth and good position (see 
Figure 31). 

A good woman with strength of will and character should 
have a wide and broad palm and strong thuinl>. She should 
not have the mounts of Venus and Nfcon overdeveloped. The 
mount of Venus should not be high and red, otherwise the 
woman would be passionate and there would be little chance 
of her having children. The fingers of Jupiter and Mercury 
should be pointed and that of Saturn and Sun spatulate and 
square. If the line of Heart has a trident on tiie mount of Jupi- 
ter it is a sign of great good fortune. 

If the hand is heavily lined, the Head line long and sloping. 
Moon soft and low and the fingers crooked, the woman has a 
hysterical disposition and will dwell much upon fancied and 
unreal troubles and grievances. She would make mountains of 
molehills. 

If the mount of Mercury is weak and the thumb poor, 
the line of Life weak and unevenly traced, it shows want of 
will, spirit and ability to shake off diseases and troubles. Such 
•a woman would have little recuperative power. 

A heavily lined palm, pointed or conic fingers, weak thumb, 
a grilled ana high mount of Venus, a broken girdle of Venus, 
the line of Heart with branches 'or with hair lines drooping 
downwards, and a weak line of Head denote a woman with a 
hysterical temperament, little ’self-control and an emotionally 
responsive disposition very easily liable to fall a prey to ad- 
vances from the opposite sex. These marks will be all the 
more unfavourable and suggestive of loose morals if the lines 
of and Heart are islanded. 

of Children. Lines of Children are those perpendi- 
cular lines which are found on the mount of Mercury (Fig. 
30, I). Deep and long lines denote clever strong children who 
achieve an outstanding success in the world. Breaks and islands 
in the line indicate delicate children and their illnesses. They 
should be marked in both hands and if this is the case, they 
are expected to be long-lived and healthy. On the hand of a 
mother or father who is devoted to children and fond of them, 
lines of children are easily counted «is they are more clearly 
and deeply marked. Strong and thick lines indicate boys and 
fine lines girls. 

The student should not forget that the eldest child is 
marked in the centre of the mount of Mercury under the finger, 
and the number should be counted to the verge of the hand. 

Some writers have given minute indications regarding the 
number of children and their health to be read from the mount 
of Mercury, but I have not been able to read them on all hands, 
some people in spite of the presence of lines having no children 



140 


INDIAN PALMXSTHY 


at all. These lines should be interpreted as referring to ferti- 
lity. A person would not be childless if he or she has his or 
her line of Heart forked on the mount of Mercury (see Figure 
30, 2). 



Fig. 30 . 

MARKS & SIGNS INDICATING CHILDREN 

Woman with the sign of fish clearly marked have not been 
found to be childless. But when this sign is absent, and the 
mount of Venus abnormally developed, the line of Heart rising 
from the mount of Saturn and running in a curved wav accom- 
panied by the girdle of Venus, conical fingers, and a thumb 
aenoting weak will power are found on the nands of a woman, 
the conclusion is that she would be licentious and childless. 
Women and men with broad palms and all the principal lines 
clearly marked and traced have been found to have children. 

How and Where to Read Children According to Indian 
Writers. (1) One writer says that the line of children are found 
at the base of the thumb on the mount of Venus (see Fig. 30). 
Long, thick and clear-cut lines indicate sons, short and thin 
daughters. Uncrossed, unbroken and faultless lines denote long- 
lived children, and broken and weak lines short-lived ones.. 

(2) The second view is that on the joint of the thumb with 
the palm, islands or Yav are seen (see Fig. 30, 4). The num- 
ber of big islands refer ‘to sons and smau ones to daughters. 
Acfx>rding to one writer, a big island on this place is said to 


THE LINE OF CHILDREN 


141 


be a sure sign of one being blessed with a son. This sign I 
have seldom found to err. 

(3) Children may also be read from the lines found bet- 
ween the lines of Heart and Head (see Fig. 30). 

(4) If the line of Life called the Pitri or Gottra Rekha en- 
closes a full mount of Venus and is deeply and clearly traced 
and runs to the mount of Jupiter and is branched there, it is a 
sign that the possessor would have chAdren and a large family. 

(5) If Urdh Rekha rises from the side of the wrist up the 
hand in a faultless and branched shape it denotes that the sub- 
ject would be blessed with sons and grandsons (Fig. 30,^). 
When the line of Heart is branched upwards and downwards 
under Mercury (as shown in Fig. 30, 2) children are indicated. 

The lines of children on the hands of yogis and sadhus or 
monks indicate disciples, that of nuns righteous living and mo- 
nastries and holy places where they reside. 

According to another writer there are two more places 
where you should read children. One is the second phalange 
of the Mercury finger. The number of clear-cut vertical lines 
on this phalange denote tlie number of children. Tlie second 
place is the middle phalange of the second finger where the 
presence of vertical lines indicates the number of prominent 
•children one would have (see Fig. 30, 7), 

The various methods of reading children have been given 
abo\^e. The student is advised to keep them all in mind when 
coining to any result regarding this •aspect of hand-reading. From 
a practical standj)oint perfect accuracy arriving at a correct 
reading of children one is likely to have, is hard to attain in 
view or the fact that the destiny of both husband and wife play 
a great x^ait in the matter. (/Cases have been found when the 
hand of^^ man showed that he would have children, but the 
hands^of his wife had no clear sign present on her palm.' Tbis 
happens in the case of those women whose husoands had, 
children from their first wives but could not have .my from 
them. In such cases, I found tlie signs of children in the 
hands of man but none on those of the woman. The reverse 
case has also been found to be true. The palmist should exer- 
cise great care and good sense in inteipreting the lines and 
talking of them to his clients he should oo it in as nice, tactiFul 
and sensible a way as he can. 

Mount of Venus, the Bharatru Stjian or Mount of Family. 
Mrs. Robinson, the famous author of the Graven Palm, writes, 
‘The events and the lines which represent the lives of those 
who strongly influence a subject are found on the mount of 
Venus. 

“As the thumb is the index to the whole character, so does 
the mount of Venus, surrounded by the Jine of Life, contain 
the record of the events pf our years. 

“Tlie more self-centred the nature and stronger the power 
of animal instincts, the fewer and less distinct wm be the lines 


5 ? 11 



142 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


upon this mount, and indeed, in the worst type of hands, the 
lines lose their significance and become indistinct and blurred/^ 
Indian authors, as already stated elsewhere, call the line 
of Life the line of gotra or hula or family and the mount of 
Venus as Bharatru Sthan or the place of brothers. In view of 
this, it is not unreasonable to conclude that the line of Life not 
only represents the whole^life of the subject but mount of Venus 
it encloses refers to the* events and persons such as parents, 
the wife, friends and ne^r and distant relations that influence 
our life. In fact from lliis mount can be read our greatest joys 
and sorrows. 



A. Parents — 1. 

B. Father — 2. 

C. Deadi of father — 3. 

D. Line of Life branchod on Jupiter showing large family- 

E. Fish showing fortune — 5. 

F. Brothers and sisters — 6. 

G. Brothers and sisters — 7. 

II. Line of Heart forked showing long hved ji^rents — 8. 

I, Brothers and sisters — ^9. 

On Lines Representing Parents. Mrs. Robinson says» 
"Lines denoting the numbers of the subject’s family do not start 
from the line of Life, as do influence lines denoting love and 



THE LINE OF PARENTS 


143 


friendship,” According to her the lines denoting relations by 
birth lie nearest to the wide looped line at the base of the 
thumb which may be termed the “family line”. Younger rela- 
tions are read from lines lying nearest to this b'ne and ninning 
parallel to it; while lines representing love and friendship of 
the subject would be seen rising from the line of Life. It is 
reasonaole to suppose and conclude that the lines denoting 
parents should be found running parallel to the line of Life in 
its early course on some hands. I could read father and 
mother from such lines, but it could not be definitely stated 
whether the lines referred to the father or the mother of the 
subject. In a few cases, the early lines were found to be lines 
denoting a loving paternal aunt or uncle and in two cases a 
grandfather, and in one case a grandmother. 

In most of these cases I found these lines running from the 
mount of Jupiter to inside the line of Life and running parallel 
to it far on the Venus mount. These lines denoted tnat the 
persons they represented had a CTeat affection for the subject, 
and did all they could to look atter him and ha\^e him educat- 
ed and well placed in life. As a matter of fact the career of the 
subject was made because of the zealous care devoted to it by 
these early and healthy influences ^see Fig. 31, 1). 

Although 1 was successful in telling the subject something 
of the influences of his early career, and the conrecl: facts 
regarding persons who influenced him, yet I was always con- 
fronted with the question that I shduld tell definitely as to how 
long the father or mother would live, how they would treat the 
subject and what benefits he would obtain from them. 

So far as this aspect of hand-reading is concerned, European 
authors have not much to say. Mrs. Robinson does, however, 
refer to this point when she says that lines of older relations 
start at the same time that the subject's life begins. Besides 
Mrs. St. Hill also says that lines denoting parents run near to 
the Life line and when they do, the parents assist the career 
of the subject. 

Indian authors draw the attention of students to the lines 
of Head and Life, called by them Matri and Pitri lines, i.e., mo- 
ther and father lines, for information regarding the father and 
mother. According to them the strengm, depth aqd faultless- 
ness of these lines indicate that the subject would have a long- 
lived father and inotlier, from whom* he would derive all sorts 
of material advantages and love. 'Fhe line of Head .stands for 
the mother, and the line of Life for the father. If bad signs like 
island, cross, star and black spot are present, they indicate 
something unfavourable for the parents of the subject. Besides 
the faintness or shadowy character of these lines during their 
course through the palm denotes ill healtif of the parents. If 
any one of me lines is sden broken, it is a sign of the death 
of the person to whom it refers. 



144 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


In the horoscope of a person the tenth house is the house 
of profession, governmental honour conferred on a subject, pub- 
lic glory and success, and it is also the house of father. If in 
the horoscope the tenth house is strong, there is a chance of 
the father of the subject living to an advanced age. Besides, 
on the hand of the subject, the line of Life or father is always 
strong, meaning thereby that the father of the subject would 
live on; and through his support and help the subject would 
lead a prosperous life. Besides, when I found on the hands of 
persons the line of Fate rising from the line of Life and run- 
ning up the palm to the mount of Saturn, I saw that the sub- 
jects had their father alive, and up to the time the two lines, 
i.e., the lines of Life and Fate, ran together the subjects re- 
mained dependent upon their fathers. Even after their inde- 
pendent career had started, they received substantial help and 
support from their fathers, who did all they could to maintain 
their sons in prosperity and ease (Fig. 31, 2). 

If the line of Fate runs separate from the line of Life, the 
subject carves a career of his own and leads a life of indepen- 
dence from the very start. Tliis is not a sure sign that the 
father of the subject would continue to live for a fairly long 
time, but the student should not conclude that the father 
would be short-hved unless the line of Fate in its early path 
has a mark of an island. This sim 1 have verified in several 
cases when the Fate line islanded near the wrist denotes the 
passing away of the father during the infancy of the subject 
[Fig. 31, 3). 

People with a clear-cut, deep, long line of Life, especially 
when it starts from the mount ot Jupiter, have generally been 
found with their father hving to a fairly good age. According 
to the Indian school of hand-reading the mount of Jupiter is 
called the Pitri Sthan, and hence when the lines of Head and 
Life, i.e., mother and father, are connected at their start on this 
place, it is a mark which denotes the length of Life of the pa- 
rents in a majority of cases, especially when both the lines are 
deep, clear-cut, faultless and long. 

Be.sides the sujpport and benefits a subject would have from 
parents may also be judged by the presence of a clear-cut tri- 
dent on the mount or Jujjiter connected with the line of Heart 
and the mark of fish on the wiist (Fig. 31, 4, 5). 

AceorUing to the Indian view, PiM line starts from the 
wrist and ascends towards^ tlie first finger. If it is indistinct and 
shadowy and not traced at all at the start, it denotes the loss 
of the father in the early life of the subject. This fact 1 have 
been able to see on several hands. But this subject requires 
further research and verification. 

Brothers and Sisters. As already stated Mrs. Robinson 
thinks that brothens and sisters should be read from those hori- 
zontal lines on the mount of Venus which are away from the 
line of Life and run parallel to the family line on me base of 



THE LINE OF B^pTHERS 


145 

• 

the thumb (see Fig. 31, 6). According to St. Hill, the lines . 
crossing from the thumb to the line of Life denote the number 
of the subject’s brothers and sisters. The depth of these lines 
indicates the amount of aiEFection felt for them. These lines 
should not cross the Life line, otherwise they would be harmful 
to the career. 

According to one author on tJie Ipdian school of palmistry, 
if Pitri Rekha or the line of Life ascends to the mount of Jupiter 
and is branched, it denotes that the possessor has brothers and 
sisters. A long Pitri or Kula Rekha indicates a long line of 
elders and a big family, while a short line denotes a small 
family (Fig. 31, 8). 

According to another Indian writer, long and thick hori- 
zontal lines on the Percussion between the wrist lines and the 
line of heart denote brothers, and thin and small lines sisters 
(Fig. 31, in 9): 

According to another writer, brothers and sisters can also 
be read from the lines on the mount of Venus lying outside (as 
shown in Figure 31, 6), between the wrist and the base of the 
thumb. But lines of children are also said to be found on this 
part as already stated, and these ^are seen on the inside portion 
^ whereas those of brothers and sisters are towards the outside 
* of the Venus mount. 

Friends and Enemies, According to ancient Hindu- writers, 
the mount of Venus is called thp Bhartru Sthan or the place 
of brothers and friends. So it is reasonable to suppose that 
relations and friends should bp read from the lines found in 
this mount. It has already been stated that on that portion of 
the hand which is called the lower mount of Mars, situated . 
under the mount of Jupiter inside the line of Life, are found 
lines parallel to the Life line which refer to those earlier influ- 
ences of father, mother, aunt or some nurse. After the 21st 
year rising from the line of Life or running close to it may be 
seen lines which appear inclined towards the Venus mount. 
These are the influences of persons who enter our life, for 
whom we develop a love which is sometimes all-absorbing. 
These influence lines are generally found on the hands of emo- 
tional and impressionable persons. People with a matter-of-fact 
mentality and selfish disposition or those Saturnian religious 
types who shun social intercourse and love to lead a life of 
retirement away from the crowd do not have these lines ihark- 
ed on their hands. • 

On very few fndian hands have I seen lines rising from the 
line of Life and running towards Venus. Such lines nave been 
interpreted by European writers as the lines of friendship. On 
the hands of men they are said to denote women and on those 
of women men. The friendship is said t9 be pure and inno- 
cent if the line is neither islanded nor chained. Any land of 
breaks denote a break in friendship. The presence of a star 
denotes the death of a friend. This line of Friendship has 



146 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


been interpreted to mean the line denoting a marriage partner 
when it is joined by some sort of line to the line of attachment 
on the mount of Mercury, (see Fig. 32, 1, 2, 3, 4). 

In India, because of a lack of free social intercourse bet- 
ween men and women, there is no such thing as friendship 
between a man and a woman. So the lines rising from the line 
of Life and running towards Venus denote on the hands of 
men, women who are married to them, and on those of women, 
men who can claim the supreme honour of being their hus- 
bands. I have generally found these .lines denoting maiTiage 
partners, and in cases wnen these lines faded out as they moved 
toward Venus or were crossed by a deep line from the base of 
the thumb towards the line of Life, it nas been found by me 
to denote either the death of the marriage partner or the end 
of their sexual life meaning thereby that the man and the wo- 
man would henceforth live as friends, as it happened in the 
case of Mahatma Gandhi, who after the age of 36 retired from 
all sexual life and lived the life of a celibate. 

On some Indian hands these lines coming from the Life 
line towards Venus have been found to be the lines denoting 
male friends. 

On some Indian hands these lines rising from Luna and run- 
ning towards the line of Fate, either joining it or running by its 
side, have been found to be of those people from outside our fam- 
ily who come forward to help and push us up. European writers 
have called them lines of influence denoting marriage. But on 
very few Indian hands have I -found them to be so. On the 
hand of a doctor I found it to be the line of a ruling prince of 
an important Indian State who became so interested in him 
that he sent him to be educated abroad and after his return 
appointed him to a well-paid post in one of his State hospitals. 

Persons with clean-cut and straight lines, especially a 
forked or triple forked line of Heart, a low-set finger of Mer- 
cury with a long first phalange and a point-tipped finger of 
Jupiter have friendly feelings and prove to be good friends at- 
tracting people to their side; but oecause of deficient Mercu- 
rial tendencies they allow themselevs to be used by unscrupu- 
lous people for their own ends. 

Hindu View about Friends. An Indian writer says that 
vertical lines on the third phalanges of the fingers of the right 
hand denote friendship. If these lines are uncrossed by hori- 
zontal lines, faultless and unbroken, they indicate happiness in 
friendship (Fig. 32, C). 

Enemies. Saturn and Mars are the planets, the malignant 
influence of which causes troubles and worries in our life. Down- 
ward lines rising fr^m the mount of Saturn and running down 
the palm are said to denote accidents; unfavourable signs and 
lines thereon indicate misfortunes, and absence of a strong and 
branched line of Fate is a clear sign of misfortune, unless there 



ITIE LINE OF ENEMIES 


147 


are favourable signs present on other parts of the hand, like the 
triple fork to the lines of Heart and Sun, and the mark of fish 
on the wrist. Similarly, the two mounts of Mars on the palm 
are the seats where palmists read enemies who interfere with 
our career and cause us trouble. All European writers are un- 
animous in stating that horizontal lines running from the per- 
cussion to the inside of the palm on the upper mount of Mars 



Fig. 32. 

3. Friend showing 1 — 2 , 2 — 3, 4 — 5. 

2. Friends showing on third phalanges of fingers — C. 

3. Death Cross on line of Friend — G. 

4. Star on Friend line 2 — 3 — H. 

5. Colour lines A^, Bl, C^, D^. 

situated between the lines of Heart and Head denote enemies 
(see Fig. 33 A). If these lines are long and strong and cross the 
lines of Sun and Fate, they denote enemies who would be a 
source of hindrance in our succesi 3 *and career. From the 
strength or otherwise of these lines would be judged the nature 
of the ill-effects caused. This upper mount of Mars is also the 
place where are marked signs of litigations, and if these small 
norizontal lines are connected with lines coming from the side 
of the base of the thumb, they would show that there would 
be litigation with members of tne family (see Fig. 33, B B^). 

Similarly, if horizontd lines are seen coming from the 
lower Mars (see Fig. 33, 1-2} the enemies indicated are of our 
own sex. . If these lines come from the base of the thumb, they 



148 


INDMN PALMISTRY 


represent people who are from our family circle, otherwise they 
denote outsioers. When these inimical tendencies touch only 
the "Life line, they distract our life and cause ill-health; but 
if they cross over to the line of Fate and cut it, monetary losses 
and interference with our career arp indicated, and if Aey at- 
tack the line of Head, these interferences would cause mental 
worries, and if they crops over to the line of Heart, they may 
interfere with the emotional and afiFectionate side of our life, 
and if the line of Sun is also attacked, the enemies would make 
efforts to bring us into disreputes. Besides, on the other palm 
will be seen lines coming from the mount of Venus and cross- 
ing the lines of Life, Fate, Head, Sun and Heart, Such lines 
represent members of the opposite sex who would be our ene- 
mies. (see Fig. 33, C-C^). 

If die lines of enemies above referred to are islanded, they 
denote persons who are notorious and infamous. 

Sometimes lines of enemies rise cutting the lines of Sun 
and fate and cross over to Saturn. In sucm cases, they indi- 
cate all-powerful enemies and the fate is blasted. Such a line 
was present on the hand of Napoleon 1 (see Fig. 3-4). 5 

According to an Indian' author, the lines of enemies ar^ 
found on the second phalange of the finger of Saturn. These 
are perpendicular lines. These lines have also been said to 
indicate sons as stated elsewhere. I have not been able to 
verify these lines, and only mention this to stimulate research. 

If the main lines, i.c. the 4ines of Heart, Head, Life, Fate 
and Sun, are strong, deep, well-traced and branched, the cross 
lilies from the Mount of Mars indicative of enemies, may onlv 
denote interferences, worries and obstacles; and the destiny will 
not be blasted so long as none of these runs to Saturn. The 
greater and more highly placed the person, the weater would 
me inimical tendencies appear in his life. But the great ones 
of the earth, like the Avatar Shri Rama, meet with the heavy 
worldly misfortunes, but their strength of character keeps them 
up, and the more misfortunes and impediments appear in their 
life, the more magniffcent achievements mark their career, and 
they leave behind a name that lives for ever. 

Colour, Lines {see Figure 32,). If the palm of a person be 
examined carefully with, a powerful magnif^ng glass, the palm- 
ist would find hair lines rising from the iiifluence lines on the 
mount of Venus indicating friends and running to the motmts 
of Jupiter, Saturn, Sun, Mercury and Venus. These hair lines 
have oeen called Colour Lines, and if judged aright, they 
indicate the type of person who would influence the subject. 
As for the example, if the hair line runs up to the mount of 
Jupiter, the persorf who has influenced the subject is a Jupite- 
rian. These Colour Lines refer to persons of the opposite sex; 
and when they indicate one’s own sex, they would not run over 
to any mount, but end between the fingers of Mercury and 



IHE LINE OF EipiMIES 


149 



1. Lines on upper mounts of Mars — A. 

2. Lines from base of thumb of Percussion showing litigation — 
B— Bl. 

3. Woman enemy from Venus — C — C^. 

4. Powerful enemies — 3 — 4. 

5. Enemies from lower Mars — 1 — 2. 

Sun. This view has been emressed by Mrs. Robinson in her 
:»ook The Graven Palm (see rig, 32, 2). 

The student should note that Colour Lines, if islanded, in- 
licate a bad influence. 

Death Cross. On the mount of Venus and elsewhere on 
:he palm, will be found lines cut by a small cross line indica- 
ive of the deatli of the person represented bv the line (see Fig. 
52, 3). 

Girdle of Venus (see Fig. 34, 1-2 and 3-4). Of the minor 
ines found on the hand, the girdle of* Venus has an importance 
)f its o\^. Desborroles says that the girdle of Venus is a sign 
)f evil, false ambition, addiction to lies, coquetry and sensuality. 
ITiis is an extreme view which has since oeen modified The 
^dle should be considered unfavourable only when it is seen 
n pieces and marked with criss-cross lines. 

The girdle of Venus runs from between the first and second 
inner in a semi-circular form to between the fingers of Apollo 
md Mercury. On some hands, it runs parallel to the line pf 


PALMISTRY 


150 

Heart; and for estimating the affectionate side of the character 
of a person, it should be carefully examined. Tl)is sign accen- 
tuates the moral weakness of an individual, tinges his nature 
with selfishness, and prejudices him in favour of the object of 
his affection. It makes him restless in love. Mrs. St. Hill writes : 
"This line never allows its possessor to rest in his affections. It 
is provocative of over-sensitiveness and of jealousy in affairs of 
the heart, of perversity, *bf an excessive and exclusive mental 
attachment; although melancholia or hysteria should not be at- 
tributed to it, it makes a temperament difficult to live with. The 
owners of this sign are difficult to please, in their affections they 
easily misplace them, and are very unhappy in their love affairs, 
and should be most careful in matrimony, they set the ideal so 
high. The owners of this line are certainly very faithful in their 
affection, even if difficult to live with. They are so liable to 
make a bad choice in matrimony that it is often better to 
wait a little later than others in settling their affairs, as after 
thirty the effect of the lines seems to be much modified.” This 
quotation from St. Hill contains a lot of truth regarding the in- 
dication of the girdle of Venus. The possessor of this sign 
has emotional responsiveness in a large measure, and if Ae 
hand is good, the subject is iclellectually very keen. Poets and 
literary men of a very high order have been found to have this . 
sign marked on their hands. On the other hand, if the hand 
is bad, the Heart line indicative of flirtatious disposition, the 
Venus mount showing excessive physical warmth and passion, 
Luna overdeveloped denoting a riotous imagination, thumb sup- 
ple with weak reasoning and will-power and fingers thin and 
pointed indicating emotionalism, the girdle of Venus will aggra- 
vate and intensity all these qualities. That is why a broken, 
wavy and islanded girdle of Venus found on a hand indicates 
a neurotic and hysterical woman, a sensual and warm-hearted 
man. If the line of Heart is straight, w'ith the girdle of Venus 
present, sexual perv'ersion ana inversion are sometimes 
indicated. 

If the lines of Fate and Sun are badly crossed and cut by 
the girdle of Venus, the subject stands in danger of his fate 
and success being ruined on account of his sexual habit, and 
sometimes of a wreckage of healA as a result of venereal 
disease. If this sign attacks the attachment lines on the mount 
of Mercury, it is unfavourable to happiness in married life. 

In short, the girdle of Venus gives an intensity to the 
character. 

The Line of Moon or Intuition (see Fig, 34, M-N.), On 
some hands may be seen a line rising from the mount of Moon 
and running in a semicircle ending near the line of Heart. If 
cleaily marked, it is a sigii denoting intuitional powers and a 
love of occult sciences. People with this mark have a 'gift of 
presentiment*. 



TOE LINE OF GIRDLE OF VENUS 


151 



Fig. 34. 

1. Girdle of Venus Unbrokei# — 1-2. 

2. Broken Girdle of Venus — 3-4. 

3. Line of Intuition — M-NL, 

4. Line of Intemperance— 

5. Lines of Voyage according to Indian Writers — N^-T. 

Line of Intemperance (Fig. 34 G-H). There is a line 
which is rarely marked on the hand. It inns from Venus to 
Moon. It is not a good line a.s it gives a tendency to indulge 
in alcoholic drinks and a tendency to allow himself to be domi- 
nated by sensualism ultimately resulting in physical and finan- 
cial wreck. The unfavourable influence of the lower side of 
one's nature reinforced by malignant influences of Moon and 
Venus dominates the life. 

The Mounts of Moou and Venus refer to the physical, 
coarser and sensual side of human nature, and unless controlled 
by the ',vill-power they are likely to be prejudicial to the career 
and health of the subject. 

Line of Travel* and Voyage. The Mount of Moon governs 
water and countries situated overseas. In view of this feet, all 
European authors read long and short sea voyages from the 
horizontal and perpendicular lines found on the Mount of 
Moon. According to some the lower pari^ of the Moon has 
lines referring to land journeys. The presence of a ntimber 
of perpendicular lines on Xuna Mount indicates a restless dis- 
position, anxious and curious to know the world outside. Hori- 



152 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


zontal lines from the side of the percussion and running to the 
inside of the hand on the Moon Mount indicate voyages. If 
these lines are clearly and finely traced they denote voyages, 
the number being read from the lines present. Breaks, islands, 
crosses and stars, if present, are a sign showing preservation 
from an extreme type of danger indicated (see Fig. 34.). 

Besides, line of voyages are also read from the little lines 
that start from the line of life and run to the Mount of Moon. 

The year in which the voyage would be undertaken should 
be read on the line of Life, when the* line branches off from 
there, and from the lines on the percussion to the Mount of 
Moon according to their position on the Mount. If it is in the 
centre of the Mount, the year is the 35th, and if found lower or 
higher, fix time accordingly. 

There are writers who do not attach any importance to 
the lines as showing voyages and journeys. They read from 
them indications regarding health, and Inaian writers read bro- 
thers and sisters. According to them, the student should note 
the principle that if the Mount of Moon is developed and has 
perpendicular lines present on it and the subject has the means 
to undertake voyages, there is every likelihood of his going on 
a sea voyage. This view is quite reasonable. Besides, it has 
also been seen that people who have a roving disposition and 
undertake frequent journeys, and voyages have no lines of 
voyages marked on tneir hands. To tnem voyages are a matter 
of cours^e. 

Indian View. According to the Hindu view, lines of voyages 
start from the base of the thumb and run towards the line of 
Life. The number of voyages and journeys would be in ac- 
cordance with the lines present. If the lines are neatly and 
clearly traced without any unfavourable mark of a cross, dot, 
islarui or star on it, the journeys and voyages would be suc- 
cessful. (see Fig. 34, N-T). 



CHAPTER XVm 


HEALTH. AND THE HAND 

Lord Buddha in his Dhammapada says, “Contentment is 
the greatest wealth, to be healthy is supreme gain, faith is 
greatest friend and Nirvan or liberation is the best of bliss/^ 
That to be healthy is the greatest good fortune has been ac- 
knowledged by all. As a matter of fact, it is a gift from God. 
In spite of this universally accepted fact, there are very few 
people interested in knowing from a hand -reader facts about 
their health indicated by their palm. I was surprised to note 
that even people in baa health who consulted me about their 
future never bothered to know what the future held as to their 
health. There is absolutely no doubt that i^alinistry helps us in 
reading s>'mptoms of disease from signs and marks found on 
the hand and so take a timely warning. Modern European 
writers on Palmistry have dealt with Medical Palmistry in a 
fairly exhaustive way, and the student is referred to their works. 
^In this chapter I shall give those hints and points which are 
sure indicators of health or disease as have been verified by me. 

The healthy hand has been found by me to be well-formed 
without being unbalanced in any particular way, the skin firm 
and smooth in texture, the palm elastic and rather hard with 
nothing of coldness or heat about it, the nails large and bright 
and the Mounts and fingers normally developed. The colour 
of the palm should be pinkish and even all over it. So far as 
the lines are concerneef, the principal lines should be clearly 
and deeply traced, unbroken, well-coloured and lying in their 
normal places. Besides, the fewer the lines, the less troubled 
either physically or mentally is the subject. 

Tlie presence of a crowd of small lines all over the palm 
denotes an extreme sensitiveness of disposition and the nervous 
system, and according to the Indian school, it is a mark of a 
miserable life. It is a fact that people have been found who 
worry themselves into bad health. The fact of the matter is 
that in this troubled age, a hand indicative of a serenity of 
disposition and mind is hard to find. 

In order to obtain indications about the health of a person, 
the student should carefully examine the nails, the line of Fate 
(the indicator of natural vitality and the state of the stomach 
and digestive system), the line of Health, its character, place 
of rise and termination, the colour of the lines, and last but 
not the least the Mounts indicative of the influence of the planets 
and the special mount type to which the jubject belongs, and 
consequently the illnesses and accidents to which he is prone. 

If the lines of Life, lleart and Head are clearly and deeply 
marked, the subject has a naturally sound digestive system. 



15i* 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


heart and brain, and, if on the other hand they are unevenly 
traced, broken, islanded, starred, crossed and cut by criss-cross 
lines, the health is not normal at all, and a long life cannot 
with confidence be predicted. The line of Health should not 
rise above the line of Heart, nor should it in any place touch 
the line of Life, otherwise the health would not oe normal. 
The student should bear ip mind the indications regarding these 
lines given elsewhere in the book as also of the nails. 



Fic 35 

unhealthy’ hand 

1. Lines broken, islanded, tasselled or frayed. 

2. Criss-cross lines running all over. 

The following are the marks and signs of an unhealthy 
hand : — 

(1) Hand is abnormal with twisted fingers, flabby palm 

and damp and soft skin. 

( 2 ] Nails are brittle or too hard, bluish in colour. 

(3| Spots, and badly and unevenly coloured skin. 

(4‘ Abnormal lines. 

5 Small lines covering the palm. 

'6) Mounts marked with unfavourable signs like islands, 
grills, crosses, tassels, etc. 

7) Blue or blapk dot.s present on any part of the line. 

8) Fading lines indicative of ebbing vitality. 

(9) Weak or broken, islanded, starred, spotted or taselled 
lines of Life, Head and Heart (See Fig. 35.). 



HEA.LTH AND TH^ HAND 


155 


The student is advised to master the characteristics of the 
mounts as a person in spite of enjoymc the best of health at 
the time of tne examination of the palm, would be liable to 
suffer from ailments to which his mount t)me is prone. 

Diseases and Accidents Indicated by the Hand, Bad health 
is indicated by a pale and very wide Life line, chained and 
uneven. If a star or dot is found anywhere on the line, it is 
a sign of shock and illness. 

Heart Diseases. For heart di^ 
and the line of Heart should be 
nians are prone to heart* disease' 

Breaks and islands in the line 
of various kinds. A chainea 
weakness of the organ, in the ft. 
in. An islanded broken Heart line . 
considered serious and the subject 
treated by the doctor. Nails in heart ^ 
them and are fluted. Blue dots are also se^ 


the mount of Apollo 
•examined. Apollo- 
of the eyesight. 
' . ’■*eart diseases 
'ndicates a 
Of cay sets 
' * >ld be 



. Fig. 36. 

1. Line of Heart islanded, spotted and frayed showing heart trouble 

and weakness of sight. 

2. Line of Head starred, spotted, islanded and marked with small 

upright lines showing brain diseases. 

3 . 3 , 31 , 32 showing diseases of digestive system. 

4. Diseases of bladder, kidneys and female asexual system. 


Brain Diseases, For ’disorders of the brain and head, the 
line of Head should be examined. If the line is looped deli- 



156 


INDIAN PALMISTBY 


rium may be indicated. If starred an accident to the head. 
If broken under Jupiter, indicates a serious brain illness in 
early life, if under Saturn in middle age. Nervous headaches 
are indicated by dents on the line and by the presence of small 
lines crossing and cutting it. A fading line of Head means 
loss of mental strength. 

Diseases of the Alimentary Canal or Digestive Organs, For 
the diseases of the digestive organs, the lines of Life and Health, 
the mount of Mercury and the upper mount of Moon should be 
examined. If the line of Life is manded, chained or dimly and 
unevenly marked, the stomach and intestines are weak, and 
the subject suffers fro»^ digestion. The Line of Health should 
touch the line of F ascend the mount of Mercury, other- 
wise it would V " weak digestion. It should not be 

double, islan/^ ^ken. If it is so, it indicates weak- 
ness of th ^aundice and a disordered liver are 

indica*^. ' u the Health line, yellow lines and 

pa^ 'm . iven and nails spotteci. If the upper 

A < -.a and reddish in colour, weakness of the 

V-.' 4.ed. 

^^verns the brains, liver and kidneys, and hence 
are liable to suffer from diseases of these organs. 
.Aioiild be read from the upper mount of Luna. 
diseases of the Chest and Respiratory Organs or Lungs. 
: aount of Jupiter and the line of Heart thereon, the line 

1 . alth and the nails should be examined in order to read 

i^mation of the lungs, quinsy, pleurisy, consumption or tu- 
berculosis of the lungs. If on the mount of Jupiter a trans- 
verse island and cross lines and dents are found, pleurisy and 
pneumonia should be read. 

For the affection of the bronchia) tubes, look for a chained 
Head line under Jupiter or crossing of the same line under the 
mount of Saturn. If the line of Health is islanded, it also 
indicates lung and throat affections, especially when the island 
is on the line of Health situated on both sides of the Head 
line. 

Throat affections are also read from criss-cross lines on 
the lower mount of Mars. Under the junction of Jupiter and 
Saturn on tlie Life line is the seat of the throat, and its dis- 
orders are rfead from islands, dots and a discoloured skin. 

Tuberculosis of the ‘lungs should be read on the line of 
Heart rising on Jupiter and there becoming feathered, and 
islanded or blurred from Saturn to Jupiter, The nails appear 
high, curved and bulbous. Tangled or grilled lines on the same 
indicate the same fate. 

Asthma should be read on the Head line rising up and 
lea\ ing a small anef narrow space between the Head and Heart 
lines 

On the hand of a boy of 18, I found an island on the line 



HEALTH AND THf HAND 1^7 

of Health rising on the mount of Mercury and the boy died of 
consumption. (See Fig. 37). 

Fevers. Fevers are of numerous types and it becomes difB- 
cult for a student to identify them on tne hand. However, hints 
to read them are given here. 

If there is blue or black dot on the line of Head typhoid 
is indicated. 

A red dot on the Health line indicates gastric fever. 

Scarlet fever is sai^ to be read from a circle or square on 
the Life line enclosing a cross. 

Fine lines crossing the line of Heart under Saturn, whicli 
rules all rheumatic troubles, and a soft skin denote rheumatic 
fever. 



Fig. 37. 

RESPIRATORY & BRONCHIAL AFFECTIONS 

1. Tuberculosis of the lungs. • 

2. Pleurisy awd pneumonia, quinsy. 

3. Respirato^ diseases. 

4. Throat affections. 

5. Asthma when space narrow between Heart and Heaa lines. 

For a correct reading of a tendency to suffer from fevers, 
the student is referred to find out if the hands of the subject 
are soft, the skin damp .and the mounts of Mars exaggeratecl 
a> it is these mounts which govern a susceptibility to fever 
diseases of the head and lower parts of the body and all those 

S 12 



158 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


illnesses which result from accidents, fire, bums, cuts and 
firearms. 

Diseases of the Spine and Bheumatism. The mount of 
Saturn has marks of these disorders. In the case of spinal dis- 
eases, the line of Head under the junction of Jupiter and Saturn 
is broken and islanded and looped. The mount of Saturn when 
hollow and marked ,>vith perpendicular lines indicates 
rheumatism. 

If Saturn is marked wth unfavourable signs, teeth are lost 
in early life. 

Eye Diseases. Diseases of the eyes are read from the line 
of Heart under Apollo. A circle with a dent indicates blind- 
ness. Islands indicate weakness of eyesight. 

The mount of Moon has marks of diseases like lunacy, con- 
sumption, dropsy, danger of drowning and diseases of the sto- 
mach, intestines and lower parts. On the hand of a man, the 
lower mount of Moon has marks of urinary disorders like dia- 
betes, kidney troubles and diseases of the bladder, and on that 
of a woman, diseases of the sexual system. 

If the girdle of Venus and mount of Venus are badly 
marked, they indicate several diseases as also disorders of the 
generative organs. 

For good health to be read from the hand, the following 
points should be noted; 

The fingers are straight and long. The palm is broad, well- 
coloilred, with well-marked lines in their normal position and 
criss-cross lines conspicuous b> their absence. The line of 
Health is generally absent, and when present it is clearly marked 
without any unfavourable sign on it, does not touch the line 
of Life ana does not rise on the mount of Mercury. The line 
of Mars is present. A strong mount of Mercury and finger and 
thumb indicating will-power, as also the mount of Sun and 
finger prominently developed, indicate the recuperative power 
and hopeful temperament of the subject who would make light 
of troubles and diseases, and would throw them off soon and 
regain strength in a short time. 



CHAPTER XIX 


PROFESSIONS AND THE HAND 

Modem writers have dealt with the methods to read pro- 
fessions from the hand in a fairly exhaustive way and the stu- 
dent is referred to the works of authors like Benham, St Hill 
and St. Germane. 

In ancient times and the middle ages, professions were 
limited, and it was easier to tell what the subject would do in 
life to earn his livelihood. But at the present time, die choice 
of professions is so wide that it would oe difBcult to say what 
the subject would be in life. But the hand does certainlv show 
the intellectual capacity, temperament, health, aptitude and 
talent for a particular kind of. trade or business, and a know- 
ledge of these facts may be utilized by the parents and guar- 
dians to select a career for their sous, daughters and wards. . 

Mrs. St. Hill says that the dominant finger decides the career 
of the owner, and certainly settles the method of carrying out 
his avocation. 

Fingers show capacity and the dominant finger shows capa- 
city directed in to a certain channel. The domiant &ger 
is the keynote to character and When found, takes predomin- 
ance over all the other fingers of the hand. * 

Professions and trade for which a person is fitted can be 
read from the hand by a careful and thorough examination of 
the dominant finger and the mount at the base of it as also of 
the palm, the hne of Head, tlie thumb and the consistency of 
the hand. 

In order to arrive at a correct conclusion as to the fitness 
for a certain career of a person, it is necessary for the student 
to find out if the hand is firm or flabby, soft or hard, wide or 
narrow. People with a broad, firm hand, with few well-marked 
lines, and spatulated and square fingers, would be found fitted 
to become en^eers, sailors, soldiers, and any other profession 
in whidi outdror life and activities are present. If me fingers 
are fairly long as compared with the palm, the subject can make 
use of his brain as well as his body, tie., he is capable of doing 
something in which physical activity is combined with intellec- 
tuifl work. A peiion with these signs would feel ill at ease 
if called upon to perform routine duties or clerical rvork. 

On the other hand, if perale have hands which are narrow 
with long, pointed or conic fingers, they are suited for indoor 
occupations. The daily round of monotonous duties is not dis- 
tasteml to them. , 

' The hand of a successful businessman is marked by a broad 
palm, fbogers evenly set, a Itmg spatulated Mercury fi^er with 



160 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


its second phalange longer, and the lines of Head, Fate and 
Sun straight and well-traced. 

The student is advised to examine the hand carefully in 
order to find out the dominant finger and the strongest mount, 
as Ais would enable him to judge Ae^ fitness of an individual 
for a certain profession, although there may be hands which are 
so marked that Aeir possessor may be found fit for any kind 
of job, and sometimes such people pursue two kinds or more 
Aan two kinds of careers requiring opposing talents and men- 
tal tendencies. 

Jupiter and Its Influence, When Ae finger and mount 
of Jupiter are dominant Ae subject is suited for professions 
where he would have a chance to supervise others and guide 
Aem. The Jupiterian is a ruling hand and all executive neads 
of departments of Government and institutions as also people 
holding adminisbrative and simervisory jobs have the fupiter 
finger and mount prominent The Churcn, diplomatic jobs and 
administation of law suit a Jupiterian. When the Mercury finger 
and mount are also strong, Ae subject would follow some 
learned profession and would be quite suited for brain work. 
Thus, a Jupiterian can become judge, councillor, lawyer, banker 
trustee, cloAier, grocer and teacher. 

Saturn and Its Influence. When the Saturn mount and 
finger dominate Ae hand, Ae subject would be ruled by Sa- 
turnian tendencies which incline Ae subject to a life away 
from Ae crowd. He is not anxious to become prominent ana 
to be in public eye. A Saturnian is serious, hardworking and 
patient, and as such he becomes fitted to pursue research in 
some scientific field. He is said to be interested in maAematics. 
Saturn rules Ae earA, and as such all professions connected 
wiA Ae earth like agriculture, management of house property 
and agricultural land, surveying, planting and mining will 
prove suitable for him. Thus, Satumians will become dealers 
in land and property, miner, coal merchant, plumber, architect, 
undertaker, jailor, grave digger, beggar, monk, antiquarian or 
worker in dark or heavy materials. 

Indications of the Sun Mount. When the finger and mopnt 
of Sun are dominant an aptitude for fine arts or literature is'^ in- 
dicated. Besides, the stiength of this mount will incline the 
subject to take part in public affairs. Dramatic talents are also 
indicated when Ae Apollo finger is spatulated. This mount 
inclines a person to be a physician, chemist, artist, painter, 
actor; if marked with a trident, star, triangle or tliree parallel 
perpendicular fines, it makes a person king, nobleman, courtier, 
nigh government ofiBciai, jeweller and gilder. 

Mercury and Its Influence. When Ae finger of Mercury 
and its niount are domiriant, Ae subject is gifted wiA a capa- 



mOFESSlONS AND THE HAND 1^1 

city for using his talents, as also for availing himself of the 
circumstances and utilising the services of people that come his 
way. This mount makes a person enterprising, and without the 
strength of this mount, it is hardly possible for an able and 
giftea person to succeed in life. Great, famous and successful 
people have a strong finger and mount of Mercury. A Mercu- 
rian is hopeful and venturesome and is suited fot a wide lange 
of professions. He can easily be a Boctor, lawyer, barrister, 
scientist, school master, accountant, clerk, businessman in stock 
exchanges, interpreter, research scholar, author, cjditor, secre- 
tary, accountant, palmist and astrologer. If unusually develop- 
ed, uninfluenced and unstrengthened by either Jupiter or Venus, 
a thief is indicated. If associated with Saturn and influenced 
by it, a mining engineer, geologist, book-binder, dyer and anti- 
quarian are indicated. Mercurians are also good sportsmen, 
and make capable businessmen. 

Mars and Its Influence. If Mars is dominant, a person is 
fitted to be sportsman, soldier, sailor, veterinaiy surgeon, coach- 
man, groom, bus-driver, circus rider, blacksmith, dentist, sur- 
geon, iron and steel worker. If weak and malignantly influ- 
enced by other mounts, low grade mechanics, poor stone- 
masons, labourers and carpenters are made. Mars subjects also 
become engineers. With Mercury and upper Mars strong, a 
person makes an excellent airman. 

Moon and Its Influence, If Moon dominates, the suljject 
is inclined to be imaginative, unpractical, dissatisfied with his 
lot. A Lunarian can, however, become a novelist, poet or 
writer, provided the line of Head is clear cut and the thumb 
indicative of good will-power. If the percussion on its side 
has a curve, a creative talent is indicated; while on the other 
hand, if it is straight, calculative ability is shown. A Lunarian 
can be a sailpr, traveller, fi5he,rman, servant, washer-woman, 
advertiser or caterer. He can also do work' which is connected 
with water or the public. If the Moon is influenced adversely 
or strongly by Mars, the subject would be a butcher. 

Venus and Its Indications, With the Venus mount domi- 
nant, the subject will be inclined to be a musician. He will 
also have a certain amount of talent for painting and elocu- 
tion. He can be a painter, musician, poet, maker df toilet ac- 
cessories, dealer in scents and flowers, •confectioner, embroider- 
er, milliner, dealer in women^s gdods or luxury trades. If 
associated with Mooh, it will incline a person to be an engraver, 
a seamstress, upholsterer, or a glover. If Saturn is unfavourable, 
Venus makes a harlot. With the influence of Mars, a person 
becomes a dyer, metal worker, barber and perfumer. 

In the above paragraph brief indications of the dominance 
of the various fingers and* mounts have been raven, and it is 
hoped that the student, while finding out the oominant mount 



162 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


and finger^ will pay close attention to other mounts and fingers 
as well and will estimate their influence on the subject, and 
arrive at conclusions regarding the career by bearing in mind 
the indications of the marks, signs and mounts found on the 
hand. If this is done, the chances of coming to wrong and 
hasty conclusions will be reduced to a minimum. 



CHAPTER XX 


FORTUNE. AND THE HAND 

The majority of people who consult astrologers and pal- 
mists are far more anxious to know when, how and to what 
extent they would amass money or come by it than anything 
else. But even in this aspect of life, standards differ very 
widely. Marks and signs of the hand should be interpreted 
with reference to the family and society in which a person is 
bom. A line or sign of success on the hand of a prince may 
mean a kingdom : while on the hand of a clerk it will mean a 
rise, of a doctor a lucrative practice and of a businessman suc- 
cess in his undertakings. 



1. Main lines good and branched. 2. Fish. 3. Conch. 4. Triangle. 5. Star. 
6. Trident. ?. Flag. 8. Star on the second phalange of the thumb. 
9. Canopy. 10. Island on centre of the thumb and its ^ base. 11. More 
than three perpendicular lines. Line of Fate inclin^ to Jupiter an^t line 
of Sun marked with a sign of crident. 

So far the word "fortune" has generally been taken to mean 
luck in the attainment of wealth, but it should not be restricted 



164 


INDIAN PALMISTRT 


to this meaning. There are people who do not look upon 
wealth as a sign of fortune, which they think is the viewpoint 
of the man in the street. Such people are high-souled and 
intellectually and spiritually disposed. The jingle of the coin 
does not attract them, and unless they succeed in attaining 
their cherished ideals, they do not ' look upon themselves as 
fortunate. Moreover, to, be fortunate in the real sense of the 
word, one must have marks of domestic happiness denied to 
most, as also sound health and mental peace. So in this chapter 
we shall refer to signs and marks or fortune from all these 
standpoints. 

Wealth and the Hand, The following are the marks and 
signs found on tlie hand of a rich man : — 

The hand is not narrow, the fingers are normally developed 
and evenly set on the palm and tlie four mounts at die base 
(jf the fingers are well-developed, indicating a person who is 
endowed with all those qualities which are indicated by the 
said mounts. The finger of Mercury is long and straight and 
reaching to the first phalange of the ring feger denotes that 
the possessor is financially prosperous and fortunate. 'Fhe palm 
is not hollow, the fingers when stretched and joined do not show 
gaps between them and the thumb is long! It should be 
clearly understood that an unbalanced, ugly, primitive hand 
with a low-set Mercury finger, and the other fingers short, thick 
and ugly with gaps in between them, is a sign of poverty. 
Besides, there are very few lines on the hand of a poor man. 

Lines and Signs, The hand is not heavily lined. But 
when it is, the ascending lines are more in number than the 
criss-cross lines coming trom the side of the lower Mars and 
Venus and cutting across the main lines. It is a sign of a 
troubled life. Very few lines i,e.. only the lines of Life, Head 
and Heart with a shadowy Fate line are found on the hands of 
a poor man. A wealthy and prosperous man has lines of Jupiter 
and the line of Fate rising from the wrist or Moon or Life line, 
ascending to the mount of Saturn and sending branches to 
wards the mounts of Sun and Jupiter or itself inclining or run- 
ning towards either of these mounts. The line of Fate or 
Saturn should be invariably accompanied by the line of Sun, 
which is an indicator of fortune. Without me line of Sun, the 
life is obscure and dark and the element of luck is sadly absent. 
Fortune and luck appear in life from the date the line rises in 
the palm. The line of Sun rising from the Fate line and merg- 
ing into a line of Sun on its mount is the mark of a person 
attaining wealth at the age and time read on the Fate and Life 
lines from where the line of Sun takes its rise. 

A triple forked line of Heart on the mount of Jupiter is the 
sign of wealth and* tame. This the Indian writers call Trisul 
Rekha or Tripatrakar Kamal Rekha, This line, if lotus shaped, 
is the sign of a milliouaire. 

Three to four vertical lines or Urdh Rekhas ascending up 



FORTUNE AND Ty[E HAND 


165 


the fingers from the side of the wrist arc found on ihe hands 
of a prince or a millionaire. 

A star on the mounts of Sun, Jupiter or the second pha- 
lange of the thumb denotes wealth. 

A triangle or star on ihe first bracelet is said to be a sign 
of inheritance of wealth. 

A conch either on the wrist or *00 Jupiter indicates pos- 
session of at least a million of money. 1 found this sign on the 
hands of several men who rose from poverty to wealth. 

The sign of a temple or Shivakiy I found on the hand of a 
Marwari businessman who possessed several millions he had 
himself made during a period of 20 years. On his hand the 
line of Head was clear cut, straight and long, rising from Jupi- 
ter mount and sweeping through the palm to the mount of 
Mars. He had also the mark of a crocodile in the left hand. 

The sign of fish on the wrist and Yav or island on the first 
joint of the thumb are the signs of a person wdio is financially 
prosperoiis and holds a respectable place in society. The latter 
sign is said to be the mark of a person who owns precious 
stones and is an honour to the family he belongs to. 

According to the Hindu view, the line of Head is called 
*Dhan Rekha or line of Wealth. Tliis view conceals a great 
truth, since our material advancement depends to a great extent 
upon our mental outlook on life. If the line is .straight and 
clear-cut, it denotes a practical rn'entality, and if other favour- 
able indications are present, success in worldly affairs and accu- 
mulation of wealth should be regarded as a certainty. 

A double line of Head is a sign of fortune. When a cross 
and star are found on the mount of Jupiter, they indicate a 
happy marriage and a rich dowry. 

Good Health as a Sign of Fortune. No one can be regard- 
ed a fortunate person unless he has sound health. Besides, a 
healthy man alone can attend to his duties as a human being. 
We have already discussed ‘‘Health and Hand" in detail in 
Chapter XVIII and the student hardly requires anything fur- 
ther here on the subject to arrive at correct cx>nclusions as to 
the health of a subject. 

Domestic Happiness as an Indicator of Good Fortune. 

Fortunate is the person who has a happy home. In this 
disturbed age a happy home is rarelv*founa. Hence the hands 
have been seen to be profusely lined, indicative of worries and 
troubles. The marks and si^s denoting domestic happiness 
and peace are: — 

(1) On the mount of Jupiter the line of Heart should be 
forked. When it has two branches, it is a good sign to have, 
but when these branches are three, it assumes the form of a 
trident which is a sim ot great fortune. If this sim is accom- 
panied by a cross and star on Jupiter, it shows a rich and happy 
marriage. TTie line of Heart or its branches should not bend 



166 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


towards the line of Head and run to the mount of Mars inside 
the line of Life, as in that case domestic happiness would be 
denied to the possessor. 

(2) The line of Heart, if not branched towards the percus- 
sion under Mercury indicates childlessness, and militates against 
domestic happiness, especially in India where a woman as 
mother is more honoured than a woman as woman. 

(3) A clear sign of fish on the wrist is a good sim. If this 
mark is found on tne hands of a woman, it is considered very 
auspicious as it denotes that the woman would have wealth, 
children and a husband who would outlive her. In India no 

g reater misfortune can come to a woman than that of her 
ecoming a widow, especially at an early age. 

(4) Marks denoting children, especially sons should be 
found on the palm. 



1. Lines on the palm islanded or wavy. 

2. Broken lines of Fate and Sun. 

3. Island on Fate line 

4. Island on Heart line. 

5. Line of Health broken, wa\y and touching Life line. 

6. Signs of ill-heaHth on mounts of upper Mars and Moon. 

(5) If the girdle of Venus showing abnormal emotional 
sensitivity, a ver>' liigh mount of Venus denoting excess of vita- 






FORTUNE AND THE HAND 


167 


lity and attraction towards the opposite sex and a weak, supple 
thumb showing weak will-power are found, domestic peace and 
happiness are not indicated. 

(6) There should not be a narrow space between the line 
of Head and Heart, for this is indicative of narrow-mindedness, 
and people with this sign have been found to 'be swayed by 
bigotry of an extreme kind. For domestic happiness, it is 
extremely necessary that the lines and signs indicative of com- 
patibility of temperament are present. For fuller infonnation 
on the subject, tlie reader is referred to the chapter on the 
line of Heart and girdle of Venus and their indications. 

A woman with a weak line of Head and lines of Jupiter 
indicating a tendency to rule and lay down the law cannot enjoy 
domestic peace as her exacting aiici irritable nature would pre- 
vent a happy home life. 

A person with a weak thumb and a sloping and weak line 
of Head rising from within the line of Life on the mount of 
Meu's is not likely to live at peace with the members of his 
family. 

A weak thumb, a broken and double girdle of Venus, thin 
,and pointed fingers, a line of Heart indicating a flirtatious dis- 
position and a tendency to inversion and perversion, and the 
palm covered all over with criss-cross lines, point to unhappi- 
ness in the married stale. 



CHAPTER XXI 


PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 

In this part an attempt will be made to place characteristic 
hands. The reading is not claimed to be novel or original, but 
the method of interpretation is certainly new and the reader 
will find that the unusual marks and signs mentioned by ancient 
Hindu writers have been illustrated and interpreted. 

Left and Right Hands of Mahatma Gandhi 
Drawings from photos of the left and right hands of Ma- 
hatma Gandhi are made use of in the book to give the reader 
an idea about the sort of hands the Mahatma had. It 
is a pity that a clear photOCTaph of his hands could not be 
taken, although a few days before his death such a one was 
very kindly promised, but as ill-luck would have it, this could 
not be done owing to his sudden and unexpected end. 



1. Line of Heart with branches or forks. 

2. Triangles formed by Diksha Rekha and forks of Heart line. 

3. Diksba Rekha or line of renunciation. 

4. Mark of bow. 

5. Flag m4de by 2 & 3 marks. 

Hie photos liereiii used indicate, the shape and size of the 
lalm, fingers and thumb, and thus cheirognomic indications can 
gathered; but as the marks^ signs and lines are not distinctly 


PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


I£9 


traced and appear blurred, a clear reading from the standpoint 
of Cheiromancy cannot be given. However an attempt is here 
made and the drawings are left to the judgment, study and 
imagination of the student and the reader. 

The hand is well-balanced with beautiful smooth, tapering, 
conical fingers of a medium size coupled -with a long, 
masterful, low-set thumb. The palm appears broader under the 
fingers than at the wrist. The four mounts of Jupiter, Saturn, 
Sun and Mercury are ideally well-developed, a very rare oc- 
currence. The Mercury finger is long, straight and set high on 
the palm and stands away from the other fingers in both the 
hands. The finger of Sun is verv long and appears to go up 
the nail phalange of the second 6nger. In view of these facts 
one cannot but conclude that the fortunate possessor of these 
hands must have been an amazing personality. Will-power of 
an extraordinary type represented by the thumb, as also an un- 
common strain of sympathy, unselfishness and large-hearted- 
ness and clear reasoning faculties can easily be read. Tlie 
smoothness and conical shape of the fingers indicates inspira- 
tional and intuitional faculties of a very high order. The mount 
of Venus developed towards the Aumb indicates a strength and 
.purity of character and transmutation of the sexual energy, 
r^resented by Venus, into a desire to serve India and Man. 
The fingers being evenly set indicate a well-balanced nature 
and is a mark of greatness and success. The length of the 
little finger and its standing away* from the other fingers ,show 
that the possessor would have mental ability of a very high order 
and uncommon literaiy talents. Its standing away shows that the 
Mahatma would not be dominated by his environment, but 
would rise above it. It is a historical fact that Gandhi ji, at no 
stage of his career, allowed himself to be deluged by the cir- 
cumstances about him, but rose above them and always took 
an independent line of action, which surprised the world as also 
his countrymen and devoted followers. 

The uncommon length of the third finger, its smoothness 
and straightness, gave Candhiji a happy and cheerful disposi- 
tion and a tendency to take even his own life at the altar of his 
principles and in obedience to the voice of God within him. 
The strength of the mount of Mercury and its fingers is indi- 
cative of his having self-control. Moreover, look at the sub- 
conscious represented by the mounts of Moon, Upper Mars, 
Sun and Mercury. This is the mark of a person who is not a 
materialist. 

Look at another rare mark present on both hands. This 
sign and other marks are illustrated by drawing to show the 
indications on the hands. The attention of the students is 
drawn to the low-set, long line of Heart which is forked. It 
forms with Diksha Rekha^ or the line of renunciation, encircling 
the mount of Jupiter and merging in the line of Heart between 
Jupiter and Saturn fingers, a triangle, and the fact of its being 



170 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


formed by these two is extremely rare. In my long experience 
of examining imprints and photos of hands of celebrities and 
examination of hands in all walks of life, I never came across 
this mark, whose achievements have no parallel and stand 
alone with a splendour all their own. 

In order to elucidate the sigificance of this rarc^ sign, at 
the risk of repetition, the attention of the student is drawn to 
the chapter on the line of Heart where it has been clearly 
indicated that this type of line ascending towards tlie mount 
of Jupiter shows the highest form of love, of duty, conscientious 
ana unselfish devotion to his country and high-souled principles 
of truth and non-violence. When associated with the line of 
renunciation, the practice of principles represented by the Heart 
line is elevated to the highest point and the lucky possessor of 
the sign rises to the greatest height of human greatness through 



1. Diksha Bekha or line of renunciation. 

2. Triangle formed by Diksha Rekha and forks of Heart iine denot- 
ing a Yogi or God-man or avatar. This may also be taken to be 
the sign of flag. 

3. Mark of temple showing fame and •uncommon good fortune. 

4. The finger of Mercury well-set with the palm and standing away 
from the rest of fingers. This is the sign of person who obtains 


PRACTICAL PALMJSTRY 


m 


mastery over his environment and takes an original and iiidepen* 
dent line of action, 

5. All the fingers set evenly on the palm. 

6. The thumb is low set and long. 

7. The zones of imagination and ,sub>conscious are very well-deve- 
loped. • 

8. The student should note that the firgt or Jupiter finger is not so 
small as it appears here. It appears to have been bent when the 

photo was taken. 

renunciation. The association of the mark of triangle with the 
mounts of Jupiter and Saturn ennobles both, and the qualities 
represented by them become dignified. The mark of a triangle 
on the Saturn mount is the sign of a Yogi, i.e,, a person having 
union with God. Its rare formation and appearance like a flag 
is the mark of a Buddha or Christ, llie attention of the student 
is drawn to the- hand next dealt with which has the mark of a 
triangle on this very mount. 

Look at the breadth of the palm, which is greater under 
the fingers than at the wrist. It indicates diat the possessor 
would chalk out a new and original line of action. In the case 
of Gandhiji it was an attempt to apply to public affairs the 
great principle of *‘Ahimsa”. 

• Look at die left hand and note the line of Head, straight 
and well traced. It is a fact that with all lii.s idealism he was 
a realist of a very high order. 

The thumb indicates self-conftdence and abiding faitjh in 
his principles with God. Mr. Napolean Hill, in his book How 
to Sell Your Way Through Life,* says, “Through his great capa- 
city for faith, Gandhi has induced two hundred million people 
to co-ordinate their minds in a spirit of enduring harmony. Tnat 
is an achievement the world has never before seen.” 

Marks and signs are not clearly traced, yet some can be 
noted. They are : 

(1) The line of renunciation or Diksha Rekha which re- 
sembles die one possessed by Swami Vivekanand. 

(2) Mark of a triangle formed by the line of renunciation 
and forks of die line of Heart, under the second finger. This is 
the mark of a Yogi or God-man. 

(3) This mark can also be taken to be the sign of the 
temple and this leads us to conclude that the possessor was an 
incarnation of God or Avatar, who wojild be elevated to inter- 
national fame. 

(4) On the mount of Venus look at another mark of the 
temple. The above marks you can easily read on the right 
hand. Now to the left hand on which may be seen the fol- 
lowing signs: 

(1) The line of renunciation, as in the right hand. 

(2) Triangle foniied by the line of renunciation aiid the 
line or Heart and its forkS. 

(3) Marks of a bow formed by the line of Life and a line 



172 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


from Venus as shown in the figure. This is a mark of great 
good fortune, and indicates a long life. We need hardly doubt 
that Gandhiji could have been immensely weal^y, if the marks 
of a triangle under Saturn had not led him to the unusual path 
of spiritual endeavour and practice of Ahimsa for the ameliora- 
tion of man. 

There is another striking mark of a flag, formed by a line 
ascending from the Life line and Venus towards Jupiter and 
on to the base of the second finger and merging in the line 
of renunciation, as also a line coming from the side of that 
line and running towards the inside of the palm and farther on 
assuming the form of a Head line. This mark denotes magnifi- 
cent qualities of head and heart possessed by the revered 
Mahatma which were used by him in the service of humanity. 
The flag according to the Hindu school of Palmistry, is the 
mark of universal fame. 

If both the hands are clearly examined, one would easily 
find double lines of Life which gave him extraordinary vitality 
to fight the forces of evil and darkness as also of disease and 
ill-health. 

The idealistic line of Heart coupled with Diksha Rekha 
indicate a happy married life and Gandhiji and his wife Kas- 
turba led an ideally happy life and their love endured right up 
to the end. 

The zones of imagination and tlie sub-conscious are more 
developed than the zones of society and materialism represent- 
ed by fupiter and Venus. Therefore it is that Gandmji was 
not inclined towards materialism. On the contrary, he deve- 
loped his “Sixth Sense," i.e., the internal eye, to such a great 
extent that through it he could come into touch with God; and 
to Him he turned again and again when he was in doubt as to 
what course of action he should take. 

Hand of a Great Indian Philosopher and Saint (See Fig. 42) 

The hand of the great Indian philosopher, religious re- 
former, author and Saint who won international fame has the 
following marks and signs on it: 

Marks of Greatness as a Saint, Philosopher and Religious 
Revivalist and Reformer. 

(1) Double line of Heart with a trident on Jupiter inclin- 
ing him to be absorbed in the worship of God. 

(2) The first phalange of the Jupiter finger long. 

(3) The line of renunciation or Diksha Rekha on the 
mount of Jupiter which made him a Sanyasi who gave up the 
world after the age of 20, 

(4) Triangle attached to the line of Fate on Saturn is the 
mark of a Yop who realizes God and has the good fortune of 
having His Vision.^ 

(5) Sign of Lotus or Padma on the mount of Jupiter is the 
mark of a God-man like Shree Ram "and Shree Krishna. 

(6) The line of Head or Matri Rekha rises from Jupiter 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 173 

and in a beautiful curve ends on Jupiter endowing him with 
an uncommon intelligence. 

(7) Tlie finger of Mercui-y is straight indicating literary 
ability. 

(8) Mounts of Mercury, Upper Mars and Moon with a 
creative curve of the iDercussion .^ow literary talents and spi- 
ritualistic tendencies. 

(9) The triangle forme<l by the lines of Head, Fate and 
Health denotes a prophet, scholar, and one possessed of intui- 
tive and occult powers. • Tlie lines of Fate, Head, Life, Heart, 
and Sun are also so beautifully connected with one another 
that they indicate that the great Swami had a wonderful co- 
ordination of all his spiritual, intellectual and physical faculties 
in his religious and intellectual activities. 

Signs of Celebrity and Success as an Author, Religious Re- 
former and Sairit : 



Fig. 42. 

1. Double line of Heart. * 

2. Trident, lotus, 'and triangle on Saturn and flag. 

3. Triangle on Sun mount. 

4. Line of life shadowy and weak. 

5. Diksha Rekha or line of renunciation making him a Sanyasi 

6. Flag 7. Bow. 8. Fish. 9. Star on Jupiter, , 

(1) There are more than three Urdh or ascending lines — 
the mark of a prince. The Swami was undoubtedly a prince 
among men. These lines are the line of the Fate rising from 

S 13 



174 


INDIAN PAI-MISTRY 


the line of Life and four lines of Sun, one of which is seen 
rising from the Life line, tlie second from the mount upper of 
Mars, the third from below the line of Heart and the fourth 
from the line of Fate. 

(2) llie trident of Jupiter is a sign of unusual fame and 
good fortune. 

(3) Tlie line of Sun is associated with a triangle, a mark 
of literary ability and fame as an author and public worker. 

(4) The main lines of Fate, Heart and Head are branched 
forming the mark of line of tree, which is a sign of a fortunate 
person who does good to his fellow creatures. Marks of flag 
and bow made him a Saint and a prince among Saints. 

On hand the line of Life is shadowy and the line of Health 
threatening and this explains his death at the early age of 39. 
'I'he hand was inclined to be beautiful and psychic with fingers 
inclined to be pointed, a fact indicating that he would be a 
Saint and philosopher. It would interest tlie reader to know 
that the Swami had faith in Palmistry, for in his biography we 
read : ‘I must become a Satiny asin. he would tell his friend, 
a palmist predicted it and he would show a certain straight 
line on the palm of his hand which indicated the tendency to 
monastic life/ 

The Hand of a world-renowned Theosophist. (See Fig. 43) 

The thumb is finely shaped, and denotes a strong will 
power and reasoning faculties of a very high order. The fin- 
gers, are knotty, and the first knots strongly developed indicated 
an author, 'lliis lady was a iirolific writer and has remarkable 
works on religion and philosophy to her credit. The first pha- 
lange.s of all Uic fingers arc longer, especially that of the fingers 
of Mercury and Jupiter, which denotes strong religious tenden- 
cies and oratorical powers. It is a fact that she won fame as 
head oF a philosophico-religious society and speaker on religi- 
ous and political topics. Her speeches were marked with force 
and (‘locpienct'. The mount of Saturn is developed and the 
second finger is liigli-set, and all the other fingers are inclined 
towards it, denoting thereby her inclination towards religion 
and renunciation. 

I.ook at the main lines which arc deeply trac'cd, and the 
l>ranclies which form what the Hindu authors call die line of 
Tree, a sign of greatness, supported by the line of Mars endow- 
ing her with robust liealth and long life. 

Look at the lines of Fate, Sun, Heart, Mercury and Head 
which are all triple forked, a mark of great good fortune, extra- 
ordinary” fame as an author, siicakei', political and religious 
leader. It is a fact that lier grasp of ancient Hindu philosophy 
and presentation thereof to the world was remarkable and 
extraordinary, and she did much to popularise the teachings of 
ancient Hinc^lu sages among the English reading public of the 
world. She was a great educational worker and ner founding 
the central Hindu School and Theosophical College for women 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


1*25 


in Benares will always be remembered. She worked for the 
Home Rule Movement in Indi^, the home of her adopHon. Tlie 
peojDle of India still remember and venerate her for the services 
she rendered to this country. 

The following marks and signs which show fame in the 
world of religion, literature and politics were .found on her 
hand. These signs, as already stated, ^^ere found on the hands 
and feet of great men and women like Shri Krishna and Ra- 
dhika. 

(1) Star on the mount of Jupiter, a sign of greatness. 

(2) Line of Heart with triple forks and trident, a mark of 
great good fortune. This is true in the case of this person 
who was bom in England, and married a clergyman from 
whom she separated and came to India which she adopted as 
lier home. The position she occupied in society was a very high 
one and she rose to be the president of the Theosophical So- 
ciety which position she had right up to her death. She was 
awarded the honorary degree of Doctor of Literature by tlie 
Benares University. She richly deserved this honour. 

f3) Triangle on Saturn, a sign of Yoga or union with God. 

(4) Lines of Sun, Mercury and Head marked with a tri- 
dent at the end. This is the mark of uncommon fame as an 
author, orator and literary person. The line of Head is straight 
and rising from the mount of Jupiter and slightly touching the 
Life line runs towards the percussion. Such a line has oeen 
found on the hands of great ones of the world endowed with 
wonderful administrative talents^ and organi 2 ung capacity of an 
extraordinarily high order. 

(5) Tliere are more than three ascending lines or Urdh 
Rekhas, a mark of a prince or Raja. 

(6) There are two fishes marked on the hand. Tins is a 
sign which confers on the hands of a woman husband, child- 
ren, wealth, rank. She had a lifelong relationshm with a son 
and daughter, both still living. The line of renunciation 
(marked A) and branches of the line of Heart curving on the 
line of Head militated a^^ainst conjugal happiness. As a matter 
of fact she was “married’^ to the mission, so dear to her of pro- 
pagating throughout the world the wisdom of the ancient 
Hindus. 

(7) Look at the mark of flag. This denotes unusual suc- 
cess or fame. It is a fact that she wen international fame as 
the president of Theosophical Society and as an author. 

(8) There is clfear big triangle made by the line of Fate, 

Head line and the line of Mercury. This is a mark of a person 
endowed with the faculty of looldng into the future and with 
spiritual knowledge. This mark denotes an inclination to renuh- 
ciation and a noble and good heart. • 

(9) The hand is philpsophic and that is why, although 
born in England, she became so keenly interested in Theoso- 
phy that she ultimately rose to be the president of the society. 



176 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


and occupied this office with distinction as long as she lived. 
The Hand of Indias Poet-Philosopher and Noble Laureate, 
(See Fig. 44). 

The hand of the world famous poet-philosopher of India 
will illustrate some unusual marks and signs found on great and 
famous hands. 



1. Star on Jupiter. 2. Line of Heart with a trident and hipie fork. 
5. Triangle on Saturn. 4. Line ot Sun with a trident foiks. 5. Line of 
Head with triple forks. 6. Flag. 7. Fish. 8. Line of hate torked. 9. Line of 
Diksha or renunciation. 

The hand was beautifully and harmoniously developed. The 
Bngers were sensitive and tapering and looked like flames of 




PRACTICAL PAL»nSTRY 


177 


lire, remaining one of the fingers painted by the artists of 
Ajanta. 

Look at the line of Head which rises from the mount of 
Jupiter and terminates in a beautiful curve on the mount of 
Moon. It has two upper fprks forming a sort of trident. The 
mount of Moon is developed with a creative cupve at the per- 
cussion. The zone of imagination comprising upper Mars, 
Moon and Mercury mounts is excellently developed. The fin- 
ger of Mercury is long, straight, evenly set on the palm and 
conically shaped and denotes literary ability of a very high 
order. 

Look at the deeply marked line of Sun which rises from 
the line of Life and ascending the palm to the mount of Sun 
terminates in a trident, one fork of which goes up straight, the 
second inclines towards Mercurj' and the third bends towards 
Saturn. The combination of all these marks and lines made 
him a poet-philosopher and a painter. He was also a drama- 
tist and novelist. His poetical works made him internationally 
famous and he is regarded as the greatest poet of India since 
the great Kalidasa. 



Fig. 44 . 

temple. 

Line of Sun triple forked. 

Line of Heart triple forked. 

D Signs of fish with heads turned upward and downward. 




178 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Line of Head triple forked. 

G — H Line of Fate from the wrist to Mercury. 

D — F Branch from Fate line to Saturn. 

R Canopy. Double line of Head. 

Other marks of greatness and •fame are the following: — 

(i) The sign of the temple formed by a square attached 
with a cross and joined by a hair line giving it tne shape of a 
temple. This is on the Jupiter mount (A). 

(ii) A small canopy formed by a line of success rising 
from the Life line and merging in the second line of Head (R). 

(iii) Tliree long lines running up the palm : H) Line of 
Fate bifurcated, one branch going to Mercury and tne other to 
Saturn. (2) Line of Sun with a trident. 

More than three such lines according to the Hindu school 
are found on the hands of a prince. He belonged to an ancient 
princely family of Bengal, and as long as he lived he looked 
and lived like a prince. 

The marked and colourful personality is illustrated by his 
possessing the unusual line of Fate risir^ from the rascette and 
ascending up the hand and branching off into two or three lines 
iTinning to the mounts of Mercury and Saturn and a branch 
from the second named line running to the mount of Sun where? 
it is merged in the Sun line. This Fate line as also the Sun 
line. Head line and Heart line are branched. This, as already 
explained elsewhere, resolves into a line of tree which is consi- 
dered a mark of greatness and goodness. 

Tne student should note here that such a line of Fate de- 
notes noble ancestry. 

There is another mark of temple on the lower mount of 
Venus. 

Another unusual sign is the three fish seen on his hand. 
Attention of the reader is drawn to marks D, E. He should 
note that one fish is made of the line of Life, line of Sun and 
line of Fate with its mouth turned upward. The line of Fate 
running to Saturn and the Sun line are so formed that they 
form another fish with its mouth coinciding with the one re- 
j erred to already. The third fish is formed by the lines of 
Head and Fate to Saturn. 

The mark of fi.sh has been praised by Hindu writers as a 
sign of learning, greatness and Parity. When the sign of fish 
is found with the head upward, it indicates that the possessor 
would be honoured and Benefited early, hut when it is seen 
with its head pointing to the wrist, honours and fruits of labour 
come to a person in old age. Both the kinds of fish can be seen 
on this famous hand. He was bom in a rich and famous family 
:ind had all the advantages of birth. In his old age as he 
crossed the 52nd )fear he received public honours and recog- 
nitioii, and wherever he went he was'received with great splen- 
dour. Even before his death the Oxford University awarded 
him the degree of Doctoi of Literature but in his case it was 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


179 


conferred tn absentia by discarding ancient traditions. This 
also denotes that the person had Jupiter strong in his horoscope 
and hand. It is said that in his horoscope he had the sign of 
pisces rising with Jupiter and Moon associated therein. This 
conjunction of planets has been regarded by astrologers as a 
very auspicious sign whicli even a god can hardly hope to 
possess. • 

Look at the strong line of Life reinforced by a line of 
Mars, a full and strong mount of Venus and a strong and well 
developed mount of Jupiter. Note also the signs of temple 
on these mounts. When these two mounts are strongly deve- 
loped, they denote that the i^ossessor would be- an amazing per- 
sonality occupying the highest social position and winning glo- 
rious fame. He lived to an old age and kept fit right up to 
the end. 

Look at the point on the line of Life from where the line of 
Sun rises. This was his 52nd year, when in 1913 he was awarded 
the Nobel prize for literature, and in 1914 the Briti.sh Govern- 
ment’s award of a title. From that year onwards right up to 
1942 when he passed away, he won many international triumphs 
interpreting Indian idealism to thg West. 

. The Hand of an Indian Statesman and one-time Prime 
Minister of a State {See Fig, 45) 



1. Triangle on Jupiter. 

2. Line of He?d wortli noting. 



INDIAV PALMISTRY 


180 


3. Three up-going lines, the mark of a Prince. 

4. Mark of a fish. 

5. Line of Fate inclined to Jupiter. 

6. Line of Sun with a trident. 

The imprint from which it has been taken was rather 
blurred and the signs and marks were not clearly seen. The 
lines and signs shown in the imprint were found out with the 
help of a strong magnifying glass and will interest the student 
on account of the following: 

The hand is e^'enly developed and broad, with the fingers 
set in a line. The thumb denotes strehgth of will and strong 
reasoning powers. The finger and mount of Mercury are very 
strongly developed, indicative of a person who would rise very 
high in the world. This person is a great administrator and as 
Diwan of two States he won great success and fame. The attain- 
ment of higli office and social position is indicated by the 
strength of the mounts of Jupiter (social position and high ad- 
ministrative job) and of Venus (advancement in material sphere). 
The development of the plain of Mars and the mounts of Mer- 
cury and Moon denote qualities of drive, dash and push as 
also strong imaginative faculties. It is a fact that he distin- 
guished himself as a minister by administrative and imaginative 
talents of a very high order. On his hand may be seen three 
Urdh Rekhas wliich as already stated are the marks of a prince. 
The mark of trident on his line of Sun is a sign of greatness 
and of honours and. titles. 

Tj»i; line of Head is remarkable for its length, for it starts 
from the mount of Jupiter where it is seen associated with a 
triangle. Such a line denotes great organizing and administra- 
tive genius with a wealth of imagination. 

Note the mark of fish at the wrist. Note the line of Fate 
ending towards Jupiter. This is the sign of a person who is 
destined to occupy a position of responsibility and power. This 
has come out to be true in the case of this person who has risen 
to the highest post open to an Indian in a native Indian State. 
This fact is also verified by the presence of the mark of tree 
which can be identified andf located since lines are seen branch- 
ing off. This kind of line denotes that many people would look 
up to him for help. 

The Hand of an Educationist and Adviser To Government 
of Bombay {See Fig, 46) 

The hand of this person will interest the reader because of 
his rise to the responsible position of an Education Minister in 
the Rampur State and later on as Educational Adviser to the 
Government of Bombay after filling posts of importance like 
Director^ip of Education, Kashmir, and Principalship, Train- 
ing College for Teachers, Aligarh. He was associated with the 
drawing up of the*famous Wardlia Scheme of education. The 
following points are worth noting: • 

Tlie hand is broad and balanced, with well-developed 
fingers which are set on a line with the palm, a sign of a fortu- 






PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


nate and successful person. The thumb is strong, well-shaped • 
and low-set witli an island in the centre. It indicates strong 
will-power and uncommon intelligence and reasoning powers. 
Tlie island, according to the Indian school, is the mark of a 
person who pro\'^es an honour to his family and people and be- 
comes socially high-placed and rich. The base of the thumb 
has small islands denoting that the possessor would be blessed 
with sons. The finger of Mercury is straight, long and well- 
set, with the first phalange longer than the other two, denoting 
that the possessor is endowed with literary talents of a high 
order. It also shows that the person is an excellent speaker and 
has a sweet and moving voice competent to sway audiences. 
The fingers appear to be knotty, with the first knot cleaily deve- 
loped — the sign of an author. It is a fact that he is an orator 
and an author. All the mounts on his hand are harmoniously 
developed, indicative of a combination of the qualities of head 
and lieart which have made him so successful. Look at the 
creative curve and developed mount of Moon — a mark of bril- 
liant imagination. 

Look at the fine lines rising from the upper line of Head 
and the line of Life at the commencement, denoting early scho- 
lastic success. He had a brillianf* school and college career, win- 
Viing scholarships in school and standing first in the University 
in B.A. This outstanding success as student is explained by 
his possessing a double line of Head, a mark of unusual mental 
ability. This is also the mark of d fortunate niuu world. 

The upper line of Head is straight and rises from the mount of 
Jupiter showing that the possessor would have great ambition, 
and since it does not touch the line of Life, it shows that the 
person would enter public life, and would have the courage 
and ability to express himself before large audiences. Tliis 
line also indicates good organising and administrative talents. 
The second line of Head m^es him cautious, sensitive and diffi- 
dent; but shows that he would have fine imaginative powers. 
Tlic upper line of Head enables him to control his imagination 
and the strength of will denoted by the thumb does not allow 
the imagination to nui riot. 

Look at the lines of Fate, one of which rises from the line 
of Life and ascends to the mount of Jupiter, a mark that he 
would make a prominent career by the dint of his ability. The 
second rises from the line of Headland goes up to the mount 
of Saturn where it is associated with* two branches, one running 
towards the first finger and the other towards the mount of Sun. 
This is also the sign of brilliant success attained through mental 
ability. Tliere are two small lines running on both sides of the 
line of Fate. The first line of Fate is branched, forming 
a line of Tree. Look at the line of Sun, rising from The Life 
line and ascending to the ^nount of Sun. From the line of Head, 
it becomes double, and on the mount of Sun may be seen three 
lines running parallel. This is the mark of a person who rises 



INDIAN PALMISTRY 


to^ the top of his profession. This has come true in this case, 
as he has risen from a lecturer in a college to an education 
minister in an Indian State. 

The lines of Fate and Sun denote that right from the 25th 
year, success began to be achieved by him, and as the years 
advanced success became more and" more marked, till by the 
time he attained thfe age of 32, he had begun to come into the 
limelight. After the 35th year, as the hand indicates, success 
in life became all the more brilliant till he rose to be the Direc- 
tor of Education, where he gave proof gf his talents as an orga 
niser and administrator by giving practical shape to the War- 
dha Scheme of education. The 42nd year is another successful 
year. The line of Health on his hand is threatening as it ap- 
proaches the line of Life. , The possessor is likely to face an 
overstrained nervous system. 

Tlie beautiful first bracelet is another mark of good fortune 
on his hand. 

Clear islands on the base of the thumb denote that he 
would have sons, one of whom would pursue a prominent 
career. 

The line of Heart and mount of Venus denote a very Iiigh 
ideal of affection, friendship and honour. 

Two triangles on the mount of Jupiter denote unusual suc- 
cess as an administrator. He has also made a name as an author 
and orator. This . lariark also denotes that he is likely to be 
appoiiAS^^d*' io represent the Government outside India. 

The Hand of a Sanskri/, Scholar (See Fig. 47) 

The hand of this scholar has the following signs and marks 
denoting a remarkably succe,ssful career. He was a Sanskrit 
scholar of repute and occupied the high position of a University 
Vice-Chancellor. 

The hand is broad, with the mounts of Jupiter, Saturn, 
Sun and Mercury very well developed. Tlie zone of imagina- 
tion denoted by the mounts of Mercury, upper Mars and Moon 
is clearly in evidence, and shows that the Pandit had sti'ong 
imagination with scholarly attainments, and that is why the 
degree of Doctor of Literature was conferred upon him. Note 
tliree straight lines on the inside of all the three fingers of Jupi- 
ter, Saturn and Mercury, an indication of a successful career. 
The fingers are evenly set on the palm, a mark of a fortunate 
and successful person. The finger of mercury and its mount 
arc strongly developed, a ihark of a successful career. 

Look at the mount of Jupiter running* to which may be 
st en several lines from the lines of Life and Head. arc 

the lines of Jupiter and denote that he would be successful in 
his ambit»f>J3:':. See the star on the mount of Jupiter, the mark 
of attainment of a .high social position and success. There is 
a trident on Jupiter pointing to the same fact. 

There is a double line of Life denoting good health and 
long age. 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 




The star on the second phalange of the thumb is 

of a prosperous career, and the prominent island at the base 
of the thumb denotes that he would have sons, one of whom 
at least would have a very prominent career. This lias come 
true; as his son has risen to be the vice-Chancellor of a certain 
University. 

Tfie line of Fate rises away froip the Life line from the 
wrist, runs unfaltering to its own mount, and is triple forked 
at the end, one branch going to Jupiter. This is the mark of a 
strong personality and ^ successful and brilliant career. There 
is another line of Fate which appears to start from the first 
line of F*rte, and runs towards the mount of Saturn. 

There are two lines of Sun, one from the mount of Moon 
to Sun and the other from the mount of Upper Mars to the 
same place. 

Tlie line of Fate sends several branches to the moiint of 
Sun, one at the age of 35 from a point on the line of Head, 
another from the point on the line of Heart at about 50, and 
the third at 55. All these lines indicate brilliant success. 



Fig. 48. 

J. Line of Sun with a trident. 

2. Marks of fish. 

3. Island in ths centre of tlie thumb. 

4. Line of Head v/cll-traecd. 

5. Lino of Fate with biiinches towards Jupil t. 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


l^i 

for>:ed — a mark of great good fortune. The line of Head rises 
from the mount of Jupiter touching the Life line, nms to the 
other side of the hand, is deeply traced and becomes forked, 
one branch running to the mental mount of Mars and the other 
inclined to the mount of Moon. This line endowed him with 
a clear intellect and unusual mental faculties. 

There is the mark of a triangle on Mercur>% a sign of an 
intellectually clever person. 

Note the sign oi a fish inside the Life line, indicative of 
great leaniiiig and deep scholarship. 

Vertical lines on the mount of Moon denote a clear glow- 
ing imagination with intuitive faculties of a high order. 

A line from the mount of Moon may be seen rising and 
running to the Fate line and merging therein. This is the mark 
showing that at the age of 27 the Pandit must have been pushed 
up and helped by a person unconnected with his family circle. 
Tnis is also the mark of a person who has a magnetic persona- 
lity, for whom it is very easy to become a public favourite. 

The Hand of a one-time Deputy President of the Legislature 

{See Fig, 48) 

The hand of this lady will inteivvst the reader because of the 
following marks and lines. -v* . 

(1) The line of Sun ^ marked with a trident, and is seen 

rising from the Life lin^'^and ascending to the Sun mount. As 
already stated this is * a most splendid and fortunate sign to 
possesSi.y -'^/fters state that it shows that the possessor 

would be famous and devoted to religion. This is also a sign 
of wealth (see No. 1 in the print). 

(2) The sign of fish (No. 2) on a woman s hand, indicates 
good fortune and the fortunate possessor is supposed to have 
everything, sons, grandsons, wealth; and to enjoy married life 
for a long time. 

(3) The island iiTthe centre of the thumb is also a good 
sign to have. 

(4) The line of Head is very well marked on ‘he hand, 
and indicates a clever person. 

(5) The line of Fate is well marked and long and is in- 
clined towards Jupiter which is the sign of a person who holds 
a higli post under the government. 

The Hand of a Famous Surgeon of DelhU tvho Was Shot DuHng 
the September 194*7 Disturbances {See Fig. 49) 

Tlie hand of this Doctor is here included as it has the 
sign and marks which illustrate the well-merited celebrity. 

The hand is harmoniously developed, with all the mounts 
well placed- and marked. The fingers are of medium size, with 
cushii 2 us/at the tip*. The hand is fairly broad. Look at the 
line of Head which is deep, evenly traced and beautifully slop- 
ing. Tlie mount of Mercury appears marked with upright lines- 
The thumb is well-shaped ana long. 




Fig^ 49. 





PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


ijb 

The tips of tlie fingers appear spatniate shaped, giving 
him energy and quickness. All these marks and signs indicate a 
surgeon. 

Look at the line of Fate rising from the wrist and ending 
at the Saturn mount. It is also branched and indicates a person 
of remarkable personality.* Another mark wortt noting is the 
line of Sun rising from the Life line aqd terminating on its own 
mount. This shows that the fortunate possessor will rise to the 
top of his profession; and it is a fact the late Doctor became 
famous all over NortheiTi India for his remarkable and inimit- 
able surgical skill and art. 

Look at another unusual sign in Jiis hand. It is the mark 
of Shivalay or temple marked (B) in the figure. Tliis is the sign 
of extraordinary success and good fortune. 

Look at the line of Heart marked with a trident, two forks 
of which make the temple. 



A Line of Sun. 

B Temple . 

C Upright lines bn Mercuiy showing aptitude for medical studies. 

D Line of Fate. 

E Line of Heart marked with a trident. 

G Star on Life line showing an accident to him when his life was 
cut short by bullets. 

Look at three lines of Sun, one long (A)* and the other two 
shorter, both ending on title Sun mount. This is the mark of a 
rich and famous person. 



1S6 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Look at the Star (G) on the Life line. This indicates that 
the life would be cut short at the height of his fame (see also 
the line of Sun rising from the same point) through an unnatural 
and violent end. The famous surgeon was shot dead during 
the September communal riots of 1947 at Delhi. 

The Hand of a Judge in the Punjab Provincial Civil Service 

(See Fig, 50.) 

This is the hand of a very honest and clear headed judicial 
officer. The feature*; of the hand which would interest tlie 
student are his lines of Head, Heart and Fate. All these lines 
denote a person of sensitive and thoughtful disposition, endowed 
with clear logical and reasoning powers, backed by an intel- 
lectual ability of a very high order. TTie beautiful bend of die 
Head line at the termination denotes imaginative powers 
coupled with practicality. The marks of an honest ana good 
judge are his long straight fingers, strong and well shaped 
thumb, beautiful line of Heart rising low on the mount of 
Jupiter, and strong mounts of Jupiter and Mercury. 

The line of Fate rising from the wrist forms a sign of fish 
witli the Life line, ascends unfaL-^'ring up the hand, and as it 
goes up tlie Head line and crossc the Heart line it becomes 
forked, one branch bendi'ng on to Jupiter and the other luns 
ning to Saturn. This hne indicates a prominent career and 
there is every likelihejd of the gentleman occupying a ver>' 
high judicial post. 

Tlie "mark of the fish at the wrist denotes that the gentle- 
man is learned, charitably disposed and is sweet and gentle 
by nature. 

The line of Ijife though clearly marked is connected with a 
strongly marked line of Health which runs parallel to it, indi- 
cating a weak digestive system. Besides nervous tension would 
be on the increase as he over-steps the 35th year. 

Look at the two beautiful triangles, one made by the lines 
of Fate, Health and Head .and the other by those of Head. 1 ife 
anti Fate. 

rhe first denotes interest in occult studies, and sliows that 
the gentleman would acquire spiritual knowledge and would 

he endowed with sccoiul sight and prophetic vision. 

The good space between the lines of Head and Heart is 
tl.e mark of a person who has breadth of mental outlook and 
e\ enness of teniperament. 

He started his career as a pleader, and al the age of 29 
conineted for a judicial post unaer government, came out suc- 
cessful and \vas appointed Sub-Judge. Sec the line of Success 
rising from the Life line and ascending to the Head line, and 
:i hranc^i fnnn th^ line of Fate hung up and above the line 
Head. The second line denotes another success in J)is career 
a‘al if fers to a judicial training, afteV which he was appointed 
as Commercial Sub-Judge. Look at another branch rising from 




his. 50. 





Fig. ■’51- 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


187 


the line of Fate and running towards the mount of Sun. Tl*is 
Was at the age of 42. 

At the age of 49 there is another chance of an elevation. 
See a branch from the Fate line to the mount of Sun. 

After the 56th year, there is every likelihood of something 
prominent and high being clone by the gcntlemaiv. Look at thh 
line of Fate that has branched off, one brancli of which may 
be seen running to the mount of Jupiter. 

Look at the line on the Jupitei mount resembling Solomon's 
ring. This mark indicates that the possessor of this line wv)uld 
be inclined towards renunciation at the close? of his c‘ai(?er. This 
conclusion is supported by the presence of two triangles in tlie 
centre of the palm. 

Look at the influence line rising from the line of Life. This 
is the line denoting his wife. It starts at the age of 16 and 
refers to early marriage in life. As it proceeds further it sweeps 
away from the line of Life on tlie moLiut of Venus, denoting 
that as the age of the judge advances, his wife would gra- 
dually fade out of his life and the relations between them would 
be only friendly. 

The Right Hand of tJu Author {See Fig. 51.) 

This is given with a view to explain to the student some 
important points connected with this sf;idy. Important events 
marked on the hand will be illustrated b/^the indications pro- 
vided by the date of birth so that the reader might learn pow 
to use the birth date to read, verify and accurately fix dates 
of events on the hand. 

The date on which the autlior was bom is 28-10-1897 at 
7-30 P.M. As explained in the chapter on time and dates on 
the hand, the fibres of tiie birth date if added bring tlie total 
to nine which should be considered as his destiny number. Tlie 
shident will note how this number and its hamionics 3 and 6 
ngnred in his life as showTi elsewhere. 

Now we turn to an interjiretation of the lines, signs and 
marks. The author's riglit hand is smaller than the left h;md. This 
rare discrepancy indicates that the possessor would be moved by 
a ])hiloso]Miic and spiritual outlook on life, and hence it is 
reasonable to conchicle that material prosperity would not come 
o him. In the present case this fact has cxime tme, as the 
author resigned a government post, promising a very bright and 
:)rospeious career, to take up the teaching profession which is 
one of the poorest- paid in India, although in ancient times 
teachers were always placed above want. 

The hand under study is a small one with knotty and phi 
losophic fingers. The dominant mount and finger on the hand 
is that of Jupiter. This finger may be seen standing away, witli 
all the other fingers attracted to it. Look at the mount of Jupit« r 
on which may be seen asbending lines from the line of Life, 
a squaie and a small trident attached to the clear-cut and deeply 



88 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


fVacred line of Heart which runs to the other side of the hand 
and ends under Mercury with a fork. Tliese lines and signs 
denote that the possessor is strongly Jiipiterian with a high 
sense of duty and a lofty ideal of affection. He has a strong 
love of riile and the first phalange of the Jupiter finger being 
Unigest with a pointed tip denotes love of religious studies; but 
his view of religion is not indicated to be dogmatic. The square 
on thf^ mount denotes ^Vrsatility and a wide interest in various 
and unusual fields of knowledge. Besides, he has an honourable 
pride. Vanity and haughtiness are not part of his nature, as 
the square does not show these unfavourable mental tendencies. 

Look at the line of Head which rises from the mount of 
Jupiter, but in its course through the palm instead of running 
straight to the other side, runs down to the lower mount of 
Mars and then turns up to cut through the line of Life and 
sweep through llie palm and end at the upper portion of the 
mount of Moon in a fork with one of its ends turned up and 
reaching the mental mount of Mars. This line is beautifully 
curved, thin and deeply traced. The rising and terminating 
points of the line are excellent, and but for its connection with 
the lower mount of Mars it wdtikJ have fulfilled its promises 
and the author would havad^efiii ^le to occupy high positions 
and become rich. Peopl^with such a mark have not been able 
to adjust themselves their environments, and make use of 
people and circumstances for their own personal gains, espe^ 
cially in those cases^where tfie finger of Mercury is low set. The 
malignant influence of the planet Mars overshadows their men- 
tality and produces a hot head which spoils prospects of mate- 
rial success. On tlie hand of the author, the fine of Head has a 
malignant influence of Mars and the finger of Mercury is also 
low-set. 

Note also a definite slope seen in the palm towards the end 
of the Mercury mount denuliiig a deficient development of Mer- 
ciiruin qualities so necessary for success in life. The finger of 
Meiciiry being low-set, the author failed to use people and cir- 
cumstances to his advantage. 

His line of Head, denoting sensitiveness, over-cautiousness, 
hot temper and an element of diffidence, has stood in the way 
of liis going u]) socially and materially, with the result that a 
life of comparative* obscuiity and poverty has so far been led. 

Look at the knotty, fingers. The first knot is fairly deve- 
loped. lliis is the lUiirk «f an author. Tlie author has always 
be^e^n mox^ed to write books. He has. done a little of 
research work in history and written a small book on the history 
of Hindu Rohillas, a subject upon which historians have so far 
thrown very little light. 

. Lot)k at the unusual mark of two mystic crosses, one under 
the first finger anci the other lower down between the lines of 
Heart and Head. Also look at the clear and big triangle formed 
by the lines of Head, Fate and Health. These marks denote 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


189 


that the author would be interested in ail occult sciences like a^s- 
trology and palmistry. The big triangle according to (he Hindu 
school is a sign found on the hands of x>ersons who lead a life 
of purity, unselfishness and renunciation, and who are endowed 
with the faculty of going deep into the basic principles of reli- 
gion and philosophy. They have also a prophetic vision, talk 
of the future correctly, also possess iuhiitive and spiritiiar in- 
sight. It is a fact that the author posse\sscs in a fair measure 
a facility of looking into the future and his reading of thousands 
of hands has been found to be accurate. Besides, according to 
Cheiro, a person born between the 21st October and 20th of 
N(,veMn])cr, makes a wonderful astrologer and physician. Doc- 
tors bom unde'r this sign have becai found to have a healing 
touch. The author also became interested in nK^dic*inc and 
studied the sciencx^ of Homoeopathy with greai aticutioii. Ilc' 
achieved great success in treating patients free of c l large, llie 
author lias always been moved by a philanthropic spirit, and thi.s 
is indicated by his line of Heart, low-set finger of Mcrc'ury and 
thin and pinched bases of fingers, as also the low-set supple 
thumb shaped like the back o£ a wasp. 

Look at the long first phalange^ of the conic tipped Mercury 
5nger. Tliese marks denote great oratorical powers, cnougli to 
enable a person to make a forceful speech. If these marks are 
read with the type of line ot Head found on the hand and the 
low-set Mercury finger, the indications art" that on account of 
nervousness, overcautiousness and lack of courage and pushy the 
author failed to use his gift of ^oratory to carve out a public 
career of great promise, with the result that he has been satis- 
fied with what he could achieve in influencing the career and 
character of school boys committed to his charge. 

If the fingers of the hand are joined, they show gaps. This 
sign is considered by Hindu writers a mark of poverty. The 
author though at the head of a flourishing High School has re- 
mained comparatively poor, and he has had to battle against 
monetary difficulties all his life. This fact is also indicated by 
the low-set finger of Mercury. 

Look at the space between the lines of Head and Heart de- 
noting an evenness of temper, broadness of mind and sweetness 
and gentleness of disposition. 

Look at the mount of Sun inclined towards Saturn which 
is strong. The brightness and cheerfulness of a position de- 
noted by the mount of Apollo tones down the seriousness and 
melancholic disposition betrayed by Saturn, which again is bent 
towards Jupiter, inclining towards a life influenced by religion 
and society. Owing to the influence of Saturn the author has 
been obsessed with a strong de.sire to lead the life of ar recluse. 
But owing to the strong influence of Apollo and Jupiter, he has 
not been able to extricate himself from social and family bonds. 
A small line of renunciation on the mount of Jupiter, and the 
big triangle formed by the lines of Fate, Head and Healfli 

S 14 



IND]^ PALMISTRY 


190 

aVeady referred to denote that the idea of following a path of 
sannyas may ultimately come to be materialized. 

Examine the mount of Venus and the line of Heart which 
denote a person of loving disposition. The straight and long 
line of Heart denotes a type of affection almost feminme in its 
oharacter. Besides, the mount of Venus has its development 
bent towards the side o^ thumb indicating strength and purity 
of character. The author has seldom allowed himself to be 
swayed by tlie baser instincts and passions of human nature. 
Moreover, these are the marks of tniepess of heart and const- 
ancy of affection. 

Lower down on the mount of Venus will be seen squares 
which denote that the possessor will live like a prisoner. But 
imprisonment in his case is self-imposed. He does not feel like 
going out, and would like to be tied down to one place, and 
nothing in the world would tempt him to move out from the 
place he has adopted as his residence. Such marks of squares 
have been found on the hands of nuns who give up the world 
and retire into a convent. It is surprising that these squares 
are absent on his left palm. Whan these are found on the left 
hand, they indicate that the person would be jailed. The author 
avoided taking part in polifical activities and hence did no^ 
go to jail. 

Look at the mental mount of Mars and Moon. The former 
is fairly strong denotitig that the author is a mental fighter and 
has the qualities of resignati&n to the will of God and fortitude. 
Cross lines on this mount denote a delicacy of throat. It is a 
fact that the author suffered from an inflammation of the tonsils 
right up to his 14th year and after the 35th year suffered from 
quinsy and had his left tonsil cwerated upon. 

The lower mount of Moon has a jumble of criss-cross lines 
showing weakness of the bladder. 

Look at the upper part of the Moon mount denoting an 
inflammation of the intestines. The line of Health is also 
threatening and may be seen* attacking the line of Life. These 
two signs if read together indicate a digestive disorder, and it is 
a fact that the author has been suffering from the 42nd year 
onward. The thinness and shadowy character of the Life line 
is worth noting. It indicates weak vitality and disorder of the 
digestive system. During the last 8 years the author has been 
keeping indifferent health and he had to pass through several 
serious illnesses, from which he miraculously recovered. In this 
connection the attention of the student is drawn to the conjunc- 
tion of the lines of Fate and Life from which the former takes 
its rise, which is significant. It appears that in spite of ill- 
health the author has so far been living on fate alone. 

.Look at the line of Heart from which under a point bet- 
ween the first and second fingers, you will find a small line 
curving downward forming a mystic cross with another line. 
Interpreted, this line denotes a disappointment in affections. The 



PRACnCAl. PALMISTRY 


191 


author had an affair of the heart at the age of 22 which proved 
a failure. The memory of the event is still fresh. The fact of 
the matter is that the affair was purely from his side. His 
good sense saved him from the crisis in his career, and kept 
up his reputation as an honourable gentleman. In this connec- 
tion, attention is also drawn to the excellence of the Heart line 
denoting an idealistic type of affection,,, duty and patriotism. 

Look at a downward going line rising from the line of Heart 
from a point where it is crossed by the Fate line. This line is 
long and reaches the lower mount of Mars. It relates to some 
fact which shocked his love nature and inclined him to a new 
mental outlook on life and stoic indifference to worldly affairs. 

Look at a small triangle below the line of Heart where the 
line of Health touches it. This is the sign that the possessor 
would lay out gardens and hold agricultural and house propeity 
through his own earnings. In the case of the author it refers 
to a small but commodious house which was created by the au- 
thor when he was forty. Look at the island in the centre of 
the thumb. This is considered a good sign, and denotes an at- 
tainment of wealth, happiness' and reputation. Besides, it also 
shows that the person would be a scholar and would be an 
honour to the family he belongs. Tlie author though not rich 
materially and financially has acquired the riches of mental es- 
tates ana contentment. 

Ijook at a bm island in the family line at the base or joint 
of the thumb, fliis sign invariably denotes that the possessor 
would be blessed with a son or sons. The author has a son. 
Look at the lines of worry taking their rise from this sign and 
running towards tlie Life line and centre of tlie palm. The 
worries here indicated refer to the career of his son which 
has been the cause of no small worry to him. 

Let us now read the main events of his career. 

Look at the chained lines of Life and Head tied up toge- 
ther and running fai* into the hand. This shows a timorous 
disposition, lack of self-confidence, an inferiority complex and 
awkwardness of manner. These defects greatly over-snadowed 
the life of the author right up to the 24th year, and even after 
darkened his career. Look at the ascending lines reaching the 
mount of Jupiter. Tlie first towards the side of the hand refers 
to a success in school when he won a scholarship. Another 
line of success is seen at the 17th y6ar, when he passed his 
Matriculation Examination. Look at the line of influence ris- 
ing from the Life line and running to the mount of Venus. This 
refers to his marriage at the early age of 17. Further on at 
the 21st year there is another line to the same mount. This 
was the year when he took his B.A. degree and started his 
career in a Government Department at Delhi. 

Look at the lines o£*Fate and Life running as one line 
from the wrist upward. The Life line is called the line of father 
or Gotra Rekha by the Hindu palmists. When the lines of Fate 



192 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Eicamination in which he stood first and won a medal. Fix time 
tlie possessor would be sacrificed to the interests of his family 
and would not be able to pursue an independent career. In 
similar cases 1 have found that the possessors were sat upon 
by their family members and failed to win an appreciation of the 
career adopted. In the case of the author, he was under the 
influence of his father right up to his death in 1929, so that up 
to that time he looked upon him as his friend and philosopher. 
His career being thus strongly influenced, he failed to have an 
independent ouSook on life. 

Look at a line rising from the line of Life at the 25th year 
and ascending to the mount of Saturn. This refers to his career 
as a teacher which started at this age. 

Examine the influence line rising from the Life linje and 
running on to the mount of Venus. This refers to his marriage 
at 17. Note also the Life line till it gets dimmer and dimmer 
until the 43rd year, when it becomes shadowy. Tliese marks 
refer not to the passing away of the marriage partner, but to 
the fact of an end of sexual life, in the marital state. A simi- 
lar sign has been read by me on several hands, when consequent 
on either physical disability of either of the two or both or cir- 
cumstances over which they had no control, the marriage part- 
ners ceased to live as husband and wife, although they remained 
on very good terms and continued as best of friends. 

Look at the line of opposition and worry from the side of 
the thumb crossing the Life aiicl Fate lines, attacking even the 
line of Head and crossing over^^to touch the Health line. Read 
the 31st year at the Fate line, when owing to oppositions he 
was led to resign service in a Semi-Government High School 
which was taken over bv the Government the following year. 
If he had not done this, ne would have risen far higher in Gov- 
ernment Service from a material standpoinl. 

This line of worry relates to another important event in his 
life. It starts from an influence line, which may be seen run- 
ning behind the influence line representing his wife already re- 
ferred to, and refers to his father who had great influence over 
his life. Its being cut by the worry line at a place where it is 
seen thinner and shadowy denotes the death of his father. As 
already stated above, it touches the Health line and even attacks 
the Heart line. Rightly ‘interpreted, such a sign indicates that 
the worry represented would not only give a shock to the brain 
and heart, but would also go to weaken health and disturb the 
calm and smooth course of the life. In the case of the author, 
the event of his father s death greatly aflFected his liealth which 
began to deteriorate. As a matter of fact, the undermining of 
his -nervous system ^ started at tliis time. 

Look at a small line rising from^the Life line and ascend- 
ing the Head line. This denotes a good success. In the pre- 
lent case it refers to the authors briUiant success in the M.A. 



PR.\CTICAL PALMISTRY 


193 


Examination in which lie stood first and won a medal. Fix tiwe 
on the Life line as 29th year. 

Look at the second line of Fate rising a little below the 
line of worry or opposition referred to. This refers to his favo- 
urite hobby of practising palmistry, which originated in a rather 
surprising way. In 1928 after his resignation from. Semi-Go\'en>- 
ment education service he tried to sf^cnre a well paid and 
decent service in some other departments of the Punjab Govern- 
ment. In this he was helped by a relative of his. Prof. R. S. 
Lahary of Delhi, who accompanied him to Lahore and recom- 
mended him to the then Finance Member of the Punjab 
Go\emment. The trip proved a failure, but greatly influenced 
his career in that it created in him an interest in a hobby, a 
hn e of which has been on the increase ever since. li happened 
tii:is. When a Wteriiiary College Professor of l.^hore came 
to know that Prof. Lahary was .a wonderful Palmist, he request- 
ed him to read his hand and tho.se of some of his very dear 
friends. Prof. Lahary cheerfully accepted the request, and 
gave proof of his remarkable gifts of reading the destiny of a 
person in so surprising a manner that the author who had a 
thorough disbelief in astrology^ and palmistry was simply 
woader-strnck and his deep seated prejudice against palmistry 
was .shaken to its foundation.s. 

On his return from Lahore the author calmly thought over 
the question of taking up the studv of reading human hands, 
and ultimately decided to start the*fiobby. He read with great 
enthusiasm the standard works on the subject. In the bemn- 
ning it appeared as if the studj^ would not lead him far; out 
faitli and persistence helped him to surmount difficulties and 
f>btain mastery of tlie art. 

During last 18 years he has had a cliance of reading thou- 
sands of hands which enabled him to gain an insight into 
human nature not otlierwisc possible. It has become an all- 
absorbing passion of his life, and he sometimes feels like turn- 
ing into a professional palmist, but the teacher in him is too 
strong to allow tliis desire to materialize. 

The in-esenl attempt to write a book on Palmistn- is proof 
of his deep and abiding interest in the subject. In this con- 
nection the attention of the sbident is drawn to the second 
line of Fate which becomes deeper and bolder as it runs up 
the hand. A brancli from this line shoots towards the Sun 
mount where it gets merged in another line resembling a bow, 
from where they to<4ether ascend to the base of the third finger. 
Read those lines along with two mystic crosses between the 
lines of Head and Heart as also the big triangle formed by the 
Head, Health and Fate lines. All these marlcs and signs refer 
"o liis gifts and powers as a hand reader. 

Look at the mark of fish one at tne wist uiia tiie 
>ther formed above the line of Heart by the secoiid line of 
Fate and a branch from it to the Sun mount. When the mark 



194 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


of fisli is seen with its head pointing towards the wrist, it is 
considered by Hindu writers as denoting that success in life 
would come to the possessor in old age. TTiis mark of fish, as 
also the island in the thumb and the line of scholarship or 
Vidya seen under the third finger where it is thick, indicates 
the same. 

Look at two small triple forks, one attached to the line of 
Heart and the other on the line of Head at its termination. The 
former is considered a sign of good fortune which in the case 
of the author has appeared in the shape of wealth of mental 
estates. The second triple fork relates to his interest in lite- 
rature and religious philosophy and to some extent in poetry. 

Look at the low-set finger of Mercury for unselfishness, the 
strong and dominant finger and mount of Jupiter for love of 
rule. The lower mount of Mars is also strong and is regarded 
by Dr. Wolfe as indicating pedagogic talents. All these marks 
and signs denote a teacher of young people, and explains the 
fact of the author having adopted teaching as his profession 
after giving up a well-paid job in a Government office at 
Delhi. 

Look at the line of Health, heavily marked and traced, 
running from a place below the Heart line, crossing the line 
of Fate and ending on the lower mount of Venus. Note also 
^at it is more deeply marked below the Head line towards the 
wrist. This line denotes that the constitution would begin to 
be undermined after the 35tli year and nervous strain would 
be on the increase. A stoical indifference and change in the 
outlook on life would however enable him to keep fit. lire 
line of Life being weaker denotes digestive and nervous dis- 
orders, and proper treatment, diet and rest have so far helped 
the author, ancl would in future enable him to live on. 

In the above connection, the attention of the student is 
drawn to a small line running parallel to the combined lines 
of Fate and Life and reinforcing the weak vitality denoted by 
the Life and Health lines. 

On the percussion, between the first bracelet and the line 
of Heart, and lower down on the mount of Venus may be 
read lines denoting three brothers and a sister. According to 
the Hindu School w^hen the Gotra or Pitri Rekha or line of Life 
has branches running to ^Jupiter or itself rises strong and clear 
to it, and has cross lines -coming towards it from the side of 
the base of the thumb, it is a mark that the possessor would 
have brothers and sisters living who would be a cause of 
worry to him. 

Tlie. unusual marks on his hand are fish, big and small tri- 
angles made by thg^ lines of Head, Health, Fate and Life, and 
triple forked lines of Heart and HeatJ, as also a triangle formed 
oii the mount of Sun above the Heart tine. On a longish philo- 
sophic hand as possessed by the author they point to wide intel- 



PRACTICAL PALMJSTRY 


195 


lectual interests. Whether these promise celebrity of any kiml 
to him, the future alone can tell. 

In the following paragraphs a method of fixing dates 
of important events by a proper use of the date and time of 
birth according to the English Calendar is given, and it is 
hoped that it would be used with advantage. 

The hand reader, as already explained in the chapter on 
time and the hand, should mentally fix ye^^rs of the past events 
on the hand and verify them with reference to the indications 
provided by the date of birth which is 28'10-1897. The figures 
of the birth date if added brings the number to 9 which is the 
destiny number. Dr. Unite Cross in his book Psychology of 
Fate writes that 9 is a figure of Science, and gives, a distinctly 
practical streak to its possessors who are very inventive, and 
are usually found in positions of trust and responsibility. They 
have abundant tact and good judgment. Further he writes, “the 
possessors of a nine are apt to become involved in impracticable 
ambition, humanitarianism and schemes of philanthropy. Such 
people typify the highest expression of impersonal love. Be- 
sides, nine number people rely* more on their inventive faculty 
tlian on their intellectual ability. ^Moreover the number nine 
a^ a digit of destiny refers to wisdom in life. Its possessors 
seem to have a wonderful accumulation of knowledge in their 
possession. Reincamationists say that 9 people are old, know- 
ledgeable souls and are with us in this inoamation for the last 
time, having completed the cycle of earthly learning." 

All the observations regardii\g the destiny digit of 9 apply 
in some measure to the life of the author in view of Ins stiong 
inclination to the intellectual and spiritual rather than to the 
material and worldly side of existence. 

In this connection it would not be out of place to point out 
that great men with 9 as their destiny number have had the 
qualities detailed above. As for example, the date of birth of 
Mahatma Gandhi is 2-10-1869, which if reduced comes to 9. in 
his ca.se it would be true to say that he may have been with 
us in human form for the last time, now born, if at all, in some 
other sphere. 

The destiny digit of the author is 9. From the table given 
below it will be seen that 3 and 6 are its chief harmonics and 
any of these digits figuring in life refei^ to an important event 
in the career. For the edification of the student it is «'gain 
stated at the expense of repetition that the palm should be read 
and events located on the lines and there tlie date of birth 
should be used to verify the events thus read: — 

The Table of the Destiny Number and Its Hannordcs. 

Destiny number Harmonics, 

1 J3, 5, 7. 



196 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


4 2, 8. 

5 1, 3, 7. 

6 3, 9. 

7 1, 3, 5. 

8 2, 4. 

9 3, 6. 

Calculated and verified from the signs and marks on the 
palm of the author the following years were memorable and 
associated with important *^vents : — 

1904 totalled comes to 5: Joined school for the first time. 

1908 „ „ „ 9: Won a scholarship. 

1914 „ „ ,.6: Passed Matric, start of married 

life. 

1918 „ „ „ 1: Graduation and start of career in 

Government Offices. 

1920 „ „ „ 3: Birth of his only son. 

1921 „ „ „ 4: Resigned Government Service. 

1923 ,, „ ,, 6: Appointed as Head Master of a 

High School. 

1926 „ „ „ 9 : Took his M.A., standing first and 

winning a Medal. 

1928 „ „ „ 2: Unfavouraole; resigned a semi- 

govemmental job. 

1929 „ „ 3: Three events: (1) Loss of his 

youngest son, (2) Death of 
lather, (3) Joined the Jain High 
School, Panipat as Head Master 
on 1-5-1929 which date if total- 
led comes to 9. He has conti- 
nued ,to serve this school ever 
since. 

1930 „ „ „ 4. Inimical number: Health deterio- 

rates. 

1932 „ „ 6: Marked success as Head Master. 

1935 „ „ „ 9: Marked success as headmaster 

and success as palmist. 

1936 „ „ „ 1; Purchased a house. 

1938 „ „ 3: (1) Success as headmaster, (2) 

Had an attack of dysentery of 
» a serious nature, (3) Worry 

regarding the future career of 
his son. 

1944 „ „ . „ 9: Serious difference with tlie Mana- 

ging Board of the school which 
mi^t have resulted in a com- 
plete change of career. 

1946 ,, „ „ 2: Serious 'ill health. There appeared 

to be a physical breakdown, 
but he miraculously recovered 






Fi!.'. 53 



PRACTICAL PAL^USTRY 


197 


as if he was singled out by flie 
allwise pro\^idence tor sortie 
important mission. 

From the above the student must have seen that 3 and its 
chief harmonics 3 and 6 hi\ve largely figured in his career. 

The Hand of a Famous Urdu Poet (See Fig. 52). 

The hand of this sweet- tongued Uidu poet famous all over 
Northern India for his beautiful verses breathing a charm cha- 
racteristic of the man and his artistic writings included since 
it 'bears signs, marks and lines illustrative of significant points 
in palmistry. His cultivation of the art of poetry is inborn, 
anci in spite of the heavy demands of the profession during his 
time, he has been found devoted to it. Let us see what marks 
indicate him as a poet. 

1. Look at the mount of Venus which is so full and deve- 
loped, for music and rhythm. Lower down note two marks of 
fisn. Tliis is the sign of learning and celebrity. He is a scholar 
of Urdu and Persian and deeply read in the literature of both. 

2. Tlie mount of Moon is developed with a creative curve, 
the mark of an artist. Note also the line of Fate which starts 
from the mount with a small beautiful fork running towards the 
upper side of the palm until it reaches the Head line where it 
is crossed by a line. But it does not stop there. It mounts on 
and on until it reaches the Heart line and cutting across, it goes 
up and ends at Saturn. A branch, line from the forked Heart 
line ends in a fork between the first and second fingers. The 
student of this scienc*e would at .once conclude that a Fate line 
as possessed by him makes one a ‘public favourite, and it is a 
fact that he is liked for his inimitable and winning ways and 
easily becomes popular in the society and sphere he moves in. 
The fact of the Fate line being forked on the mount of Moon 
leads one to the conclusion that the gentleman would pursue 
some fine art w’th a lot of creative abilities. The mount of 
Moon is well developed to indicate fine imagination. 

3. The line of Heart and the mount of Venus indicate 
qualities of sympathy and kindness with lot of romance and 
love in his nature, and these have urged him to write beautiful 
poems. 

4. Look at the line of Head which in his hand rises from 
the mount of Jupiter and touching the inner line of Life sweeps 
on to the other side of palm in a beautiful curve until it reaches 
beyond the middle of the palm from* where it ascends towards 
the little finger. Thfe Head line, the student would easily note, 
shows fine imaginative talents, but the fact of its being turned 
towards Mercuiy mount and the line of Heart indicates that the 
possessor would also be moved by material tendencies.* 

5. The mount of Mercury and its finger are normally 
developed to show that the; subject would possess sufficient abi- 
lities to carry out ideas promised by the mounts of Venus and 
Moon. 



198 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


6. Lastly the fingers are conical and smooth and indicate 
inspirational and intuitional powers necessary for a poet If his 
line of Head had not ended in an upper curve towards Mercury 
but had terminated towards Moon mount it would have been 
a magnificent sign. For in that case material and worldly in- 
terests would not have taken most of his time and he would 
have followed his inborn mental poetical tendencies. 

Let us note other points on his hand. 

The strength of the mounts of Mercury, Sun and Mars in- 
dicate a fine sportsman of charming manners. 

Look at the two signs of fish present above the line of 
Heart with heads pointing downward, one under the second 
and third fingers, and the other made by the line of Sun and 
a line curving towards the fingers, which branches off in a fork 
to the Sun mount and the line on Mercury. Both the marks 
point to honours and fame coming to a j^erson in old age. There 
is every likelihood of his leaping to greater fame than hitherto 
achieved by him, and he may produce some fine work of art 
worthy of nim and the place he belongs to, for Panipat is at 
once famous for its decisive battles and poets and divines. 
The Hand of a Care-free All-round Sportsman (See Fig. 53). 

1. Examine the mounts and fingers of Sun and Mercury 
to read his cheerful spirit, self-control and coolness in face of 
defeat. Lower and. Upper Mars show aggressive and defen- 
sive qualities as also a spirit of resignation to take defeat in a 
sporting spirit. Look at the 2nd phalange of his Saturn finger 
indicating an interest in outdoor life and activities. He is an 
all-round sportsman with a lot of grit and persistence to play 
a losing game in a remarkable way. I have personally seen 
him winning a game when chances were veiy remote, through 
steadiness and courage. All these qualities are made use of 
efficiently by him because of his ha>'ing a clearly traced and 
straight line of Head slightly joined at tne commencement with 
the Life line. 'Fhe line also indicates a care-free person who 
takes a seiisible view of life. The Head line being straight indi- 
cates a tnithful person. 

Notice the absence of lines on the Venus mount and cross 
lines from the side of the thumb to the inside of the palm. This 
is the mark of a person who does not allow worldly worries to 
cloud his life. 

The forked line of Heart is the mark of constanev and in- 
dicates deep and unfaltering affection towards all. He is a 
lovable man who sheds happiness around him. He has remark- 
able qualities of adjustment. 

Look at the lines of Fate. One rises from Luna and ends 
the Head line. His career as a teacher started at 24 and 
ended at 35. After this he obtained a physical education dip- 
loma and entered Government Service in the Punjab. Look at 
the second line of Fate starting from the Head line and going 



PRACTICAL PALyriSTRY 


199 


Up the hand. His Fate line indicates that he would win popu- 
larity. He has always proved popular with his pupils and has 
succeeded in infusing enthusiasm among the players in games. 
Physical instructors of his type would, if appointed in all edu- 
cational institutions in India, create a real love of games which 
we Indians lack so much. * ^ • 

The attention of the student is cjrawn to the absence of 
strongly marked lines on Venus running parallel to the Life or 
coming out of it, as also on the Mercury mount. This indicates 
that he although loving i)y nature would not allow himself to be 
deeply moved by any of his three wi\'es who had a chance of 
entering his life. 

Look at the line coming from llie Heart line, fulling to the 
Head line and cutting the Fate line at the age of -10. This 
refers to the death of his second wife. 

Look at the islands on the family line. They refer to the 
fact that he would have sons. 

The fewness of lines as found on his hand, along with the 
indications of a happy, care-free disposition is very rare in this 
troubled age. He is very likely to lead a hajjpy and contented 
life right up to the end. Tliis ii> itself is a sign of rare good 
fortune. 

The Hand of an Author of International Fame (See Fig. 54) 

This is the hand of a scnolar and author who has won inter- 
national fame. Look at the mounts of Sun, Mercur>% Uppeif 
Mars and Moon which are more developed than the motmts on 
the opposite side of the hand. . ‘The finger of Mercury though 
low-set is straight and long, indicative of literary ability of a 
high order. The third and second fingers are of a spatiilatc 
shape. The dominance of the zone of imagination and the 
sub-conscious, represented by the mounts referred to abo\e, 
indicates extraorclinary creative and imaginative talents. The 
vertical lines on Mercury denote psychological gifts and talents 
for scientific studies. The straightness, length and shape of the 
little finger is a sign of facility of expression which distinguishes 
his writings. Look at the thumb which is long and the nail 
phalange of the fingers which is longer than the other two. 
This mark endows him with inspirational and intuitional facul- 
ties. The finger of Jupiter is conical and its first phalange being 
long when read with the indications of the strong fingers of 
Saturn; denotes that the owner would be moved oy religious 
feelings and would use his imagination sublimated, because of 
the presence of twio marks of temple made by the Fate line 
with lines from the mount of Moon merging into it, to go deep 
into the perennial philosophy and present before the world an 
exposition of it. He is an ideahst. The marks of fish at the 
wrist, the triangle associated with the line, of Head which is 
the most animated and strongest line on his hand and which 
terminates on the upper mount of Mars denoting thereby that 
the possessor woulci, through his intuitional and revolutionary 



200 


INDI;j^N PALMISTRY 


tone of mind, take an independent view of religious philosophy 
and would be gifted with discrimination or Viveka or Qyan as 
it is termed in Hindu Philosophy. He would have been a Gyan 
Yogi if a triangle had been seen on the mount of Saturn asso- 
ciated with the line of renunciation encircling the mount of 
Japiter, as in the case of Swami Vivekanand and Mahatma Gan- 
dhi ji. It is a fart that the owner of this hand has made a com- 
parative study of the principal religions of the world and oc- 
cupied a chair of Professor of Comparative Religions in one of 
the Indian Universities. 



THE HAND OF AN AUTHOR OF INTERNATIONAL FAME 
1. Fish. 2. F'lajyf. 3. Vortical lines on Mercury .showing psychological gifts 
and scientific talents. 4, Temple. 5. Triangle. 6. Trident. 

The marks of international fame as an author are given 
below : — 

1. A line from the Hne of Head to Tupiter associated with 
a trial igle there assumes the mark of nag, denoting that the 
fame would be won through mental and literary ability. 

2. Tlie line of Fate associated with the mark of temple, 
ascending the mount of Saturn and inclining towards Jupiter 
indicates thereby that the career would be prominent. 

3. The line Sun is seen with a trident. 

4. The mark of fish is the sign tif scholarship and confers 
on the owner vast acquisition ana accumulation of knowledge 
and a good and i:>iou5 religious nature. 


PRACTICAL PAL^|ISTRY 


201 


5. Mark of temple on the mount of Moon, coupled wth 
the strength of Saturn and its finger, denoting mystical and 
religious studies, is the sign that the imaginative ana intuitional 
faculties would be used in the religious sphere and through it 
to write books of international fame. 

6. His is the hand of a creative artist with an uncommon- 
ly active imaginative faculty through ivhich he has been able 
to produce glowing images. The finger of Sun is sjiatulated 
ana beautifully shaped and the mount marked with a trident 
giving him fame as an artist. 

The Hand of a Literary Genius Who Has Won International 
Fame (See Fig. 55) 

This is the hand of a person who had a formal school edu- 
cation for only five years, but made himself one of the most 
distinguished writers of the age and was awarded the Nobel 
prize for literature. 

Look at the line of Head, and the mount and finger of 
Mercury which is straight and long, a mark of h’terary ability, 
excellence of intellect and devotion to literature. The depth and 
thinness of the line denotes learning and a hard mental student. 
By the time he was 12, he hadT read the writings of many 
famous authors. 

I>ook at the line of Fate which starts from the wrist away 
from the Life line and ascends the hand.* This is the mark of 
a person who carves a career for btmself 

I..ook at a line from Life Ime at the age of 15 to Jupiter 
(see B-B). Tliis was the year wnen he started his career as a 
clerk. The next memorable year in his career was the 20th. 
See another line (C-C) springing from the Life line and ascend- 
ing to Jupiter. This was the year when he started on his lite- 
rary career that was destined to bring him a fortune and make 
his name famous all over the world. Look at the line of Sun 
(4) rising at that age and a line from Moon touching it. The 
Moon mount is uricommonly developed, indicating imaginative 
and creative talents, and a line from it to Success line and 
forming into a mark of fish is the sign of a creative artist in 
the field of literature. For nine years from the 20th year on- 
wards this remarkable person struggled with great persistence 
to fix himeslf up in life. The line of Fate denoting the period 
up to the 29th year was shadowy, byt after this year it was 
supported and reinforced by another line (5) ascending thd 
Saturn mount. Read this year on the principal line of Fate 
opposite to the point of its start. From this year onwards suc- 
cess began to come to him. But this was delayed up to the 
35th year, after which fortune began to smile upon him. 

Look at the finger of Mercury which is Jowest and the line 
of Head which rises from inside the line of Life. The first finger 
is also low-set. These marks denote that the owner was handi- 
capped in early life by shyness, timidity and self-consciousness, 



2Q2 


INDp^ PALMISTRY 


bivt by dint of will-power (see the long strong thumb) he over- 
came these serious defects and became one of the most brilliant 
speakers and debaters of this age. 



Fig, 55. 

THE HAND OF A LITER ARY ^GENIUS WHO HAS WON 
INTERNATIONAL FAME 

1. Trident on Jnpittir. 2. Trident on Sun. 3. Trident on Mercury. 4. More 
than tliree perpendicular lines from wrist upward. 5. Flag. 6. Line of Head 
triple forked. 7. Line of Inhiitjion. 8. Mercury finger straight. Percussion 
toward moon side developecl- 

At about 42 note the influence line (marked R-R) and the 
Success line from the Life line to Saturn (5). These signs de- 
note marriage with a rich heiress and a complete change in his 
life. This marriage proved to be a happy one. Mark the near- 
ness of this line to the Life line. This union lasted for 45 years 
until his wife's death when he was 87 year old. Look at a 
line rising from the influence line and ending at Mercury in the 



PRACTICAL PALI^ISTRY 


203 


form of a trident (see No. 3), This indicates success after mar- 
riage in the literary field. World fame and good fortune are 
read from the following marks: 

1. There are tridents associated with tlie line of Heart on 
Jupiter, the line of Sun on the Sun mount, and a line to Mer- 
cury (see 1, 2 and 3). The line of Head is also triple forked, 
and its termination on tlie mount of >Jars sending a branch to 
the mount of Moon indicates that the owner would have a 
revolutionary impulse and through his powerful pen create a 
stir in society. 

2. The mark of a tree is the sign of fortune ajid fame ac- 
cording to the Indian scliool. Tfie fortunate owner of the mark 
does as much good to his fellow beings as a tree does to those 
who rest under its welcome shade. This line is clearly seen on 
his hand as most of the main lines are beautifully branched. 
The lines if associated with branches assumes the sign of a tree. 

3. The line of intuition (see 7) gives him the uncommon 
faculty of going deep into the realities of life. 

4. There are more than fhree ascending lines on the hand. 
According to the Hindu School, this is the sign of a prince and 
a foitunate man. Tlie owner of* this hand though uncrowned 

•holds a position in the literar>" world which is in no way inferior 
to that of a prince. , 

5. A line from the line of Head to the Mercury mount 
terminates in a triple fork. This* is the* sign of extraordinary 
fame in the field of literature. 

6. The fingers of Sun and Mercury indicate dramatic ta- 
lents of a high order. 

7. The sign of a flag on Jupiter and Saturn, the mark of 
a star on Jupiter. 

8. The owner of this hand, owing to his clear-cut Life line 
reinforced by a line of Mars running parallel to it, possesses a 
robust and sound constitution and keeps good health even at 
the advanced age of 94. 

Tlie lines of his hand denote that he is rich. 

The Hand of a Famous Author — (See Fig. 56). 

The hand of this famous writer is inserted to illustrate the 
following marks and signs: — 

1. The fingers are evenly set in the palm, a sign of a men- 
tally balanced personality who would achieve magnificent suc- 
cess in life. 

2. The finger ‘of Mercury is straight with a long nail pha- 
lange, a sign of literary and mental ability. 

3. There are two lines of Head. One is tied with the h'ne 
of Life denoting a nervous, cautious and diffident disposition. 
The second rises from the mount of Jupiter and runs straight 
and long towards the other side of the hand. This is the mark 
of great independence of* character and a go-ahead spirit, and 
people with the mark drift unconsciously into public life. The 



204 


INDl^XN PALMI^^TRY 


owner of this hand won name and fame as a jperson of un* 
common literary ability, wielded a powerful and facile pen and 
earned international celebrity as a writer whose books are read 
with interest all the world over. 



] . Line of Head. 

2. Second line of Head. 

3. Line of S»in rising from line of Life, 

4. Line of Fatr- forked on Saturn aiid branched thus denoting line 
of tree. 

Mystic Cl OS':. 

G. Mark bow on Moon mount. 

Tlic liiu' 1)1 Fate (sec No. 4) vises from the wrist and 
asernds io tlie mount of Saturn where it is forked. In its course 
through the palm, it throws branclu^s to the mount of Sun 
denoting tlial the owmerAvon unusual celebritv' and success in 
the profession of a palmist "and astrologer that he adopted- The 
line of Fate is associated with a mystic cross '(see 5), a mark that 
ho w^oiild make palmistry and astrology his profession. 

The line of Sun on his hand rises from th^ line of Life 
and reaches mount of Sun, a mark that the subject would rise 
to the top of his piMfession, and become immensely rich. 

The mounts of Mercury, upper Nlars and Moon are extra- 
ordinarily d(‘velopeJ, and there is a creative curve on the per- 



205 


PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 
• \ 

cussion. The finger of Mercury is straight and long with the 
first phalange of the same longer than the other two. These 
marks denote a strong imagination and literary talents. 

There are more than two Urdh Rekhas, The line of Fate 
is branched (the mark of a tree), denoting a person of high so- 
cial position who leads a princely life. 

There is a line on the mount of Moon like a bow, a sign of 
uncommon intuitional and occult powers. This is the mark of 
fame. 

There are two triari]gles, one made by the lines of Fate and 
Head and a faintly looking line of Health; and the other by the 
lines of Sun, Heart and Fate. These indicate that the owner 
would possess intuitional powers, a natural prophetic vision 
and spiritual insight and would be master of secret sciences. 

There is the mark of a spearhead, a mark of fame. 

The Hand of a Famous Literary Man and Author (See Fig. 57) 

This hand of the most famous literary figure of his time 
and die most widely read humorous writer of all time will in- 
terest the reader because of the unusual lines and signs found 
in his hand. Boni in poverty and obscurity this remarkable 
man rose to be famous and made \nillions of pounds by writing 
books. 

7Tie hand is evenly balanced.* The thumb is well-shaped 
and strong. The fingers set on a line denote a balance of capa- 
city and good fortune. The Mercliry finger, straight and long, 
shows uncommon literary ability. Note the length of the first 
phalange of this finger. The fibgers are knotted and the first 
knot, the sign of an author, is noticeable. Another mark of his 
literary talents is a branch of the line of Head associated with 
a triangle on Jupiter. Besides, this fact is supported by a line 
from the Life line forming into a flag on the same mount (see 
No. 1). The mark of flag according to the Hindu School de- 
notes immortal fame, won by this author by writing two books 
which will be read throughout the centuries to come. 

On his hands may be seen five marks of fish denoting learn- 
ing, charity and happiness. 

Two lines of Fate on his hand may be seen springing from 
the mount of Moon, one terminating on Jupiter with a fork and 
the other on Saturn (see 2). When the Fate line connects the 
mount of Moon with Jupiter, it is die mark of a person of 
great personal magnetism who becomes a public favourite and 
pursues a public career of great brilliance and prominence. Such 
an association of Moon and Jupiter is considered a fortunate 
sign. This brilliant man was magnificently successful as a pub- 
lic humorous speaker, and allliough at the age of 58 (see small 
lines crossing the line of Sun and the two lines of Fate forming 
into an island), ran into heavy debt, he refused to declare Kim- 
self bankrupt and made* enough money by delivering public 
lectures to pay off all his debts. 

S 15 



206 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 



Fig. 57. 

THE HAND OF A FAMOUS LITEHARY MAN AND AUTHOR 

1. Triangle on Jupiter associated witli a Jinc of Jupiter. 

2. Line of Fate running to Jupifer and Saturn cut by two small 
lines and forming an island. 

3. Line of Sun marked' with a trident and accompanied by several 
small vertical lines on Sun mount and crossed by small lines. 

4. Five marks of fish. 

5. Line of Head forked at the end. 

6. Line of Heart forked. 

7-8. Omch. 

Influcnicc LiiiO. 

The line oi Heart is double and is triple forked on Jupiter, 
a mark of great good fortune and the sign of a millionaire. '^This 


PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


207 


line is faultless and rises on to Jupiter. It is a fact that this 
man was more fortunate in love than in business. 

The line of Head is straight, evenly traced, well-marked 
and forked at the end (see 5). This line is called bv ancient 
Hindu writers Dhan Rekha or the line of wealth ana mother. 
In this case it is remarkable for its straightnes.s, depth and 
points of rise and termination, indicative of a famous genius. 
From its strength and excellence may be inferred that the 
mother whom it represents must have been a remarkable wo- 
man. That this man inherited his splendid gift of humour from 
his mother is perfectly true. 

Look at the line of Sun which rises from the plain of Mars 
and ends on the mount of Sun with a trident, one fork of which 
is inclined towards Mercury, the second goes to its own mount 
and the third is bent towards the second finger. This is the 
mark of an unusual success attained hy a person. Famous 
universities of England and America confen*ed upon him hono- 
rary degrees. 

Look at the wrist where you will find the sign of a conch. 
This is the mark of a multi-iriillionaire. It also denotes great- 
ness (see 8). 

' Look at the line of Life which is reinforced by a second 
line of Life or Mars running paralle} to it. This gave him great 
and unusual vitality, and he lived up to a ripe age of 76 full of 
honour and glory, • 

The early life of this man was nara and was passed in 
poverty. Note the lines of Fate and Sun starting from the plain 
of Mars and not from the wrist. He was a self-made man and 
had schooling for a very short time having left school at the 
age of 12. By dint of hard work and merit he rose to be one 
of the greatest literary figures of the world. 

Look at the influence line (marked 9). It is .cut and stopped 
by a line of worry from Mars. It represents the death or his 
father, when he was only 12 years old. It was a memorable 
year in his career. After tiiis he left school and a change in his 
career took place. Look at the line of Jupiter risi^ from this 
place to Jupiter and associated with a triangle. This created 
aspirations and ambitions in his mind. 

Look at a line marked 10. It rises from the line of Head and 
gets merged in a triangle on Jupiter, and indicates beginning 
of mental aspirations and ambitions, ^is took place at nie age 
of 15, and was the most important and memorable event in his 
life. It refers to the fact that a page tom from the life of Joan 
of Arc, which he chanced to pick up and read, had a wonderful 
influence on his life; for it awakened in him an interest in all 
liistory and laid the foundation of that intellectual life which 
he lea later on. 

Look al the Fate lines*forming into an island and the three 
or four lines on Sun mount crossed by other horizontal lines 



208 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


and the short second phalange of the Mercury finger. The 
presence of more than one line on the Sun mount denotes that 
besides his principal career as an author, he was drawn to 
other business schemes, wherein he failed miserably (see the 
cross lines on lines of Sun and island in the Fate lines). The 
shortness of the second phalange of the Mercury finger is the 
sign of deficiency in business ability. 

It is a fact that this remarkable man lacked business talents. 
He was a scholar and man of intellect. Scholars and students 
are bad business men. He made the n)istake of launching busi- 
ness schemes which resulted in huge financial losses, involv- 
ing him in heavy debt which he paid off by working hard in 
spite of ill-healtn. His honesty and courageous and honour- 
able nature are read from the mount of Jupiter, signified by a 
triangle and the forked line of Heart. 

Note that after the 63rd year, right up to his death at the 
age of 76, he lived well in honour and glory (see that the 
lines of fate and Sun are clear and the latter is triple forked, 
a magnificent sign of success). 

The Hand of a Famous Journalist (See Fig. 58). 

Tlie hand is broad, with all the mounts well-developed, 
endowing him with all the magnificent qualities of head and 
heart. The fingers denote, quickness of intellect and an ex- 
cellent capacity to put his ideas into practical shape. 

Note that the line of Head rises from the mount of Jupi- 
ter, and after touching the Life line runs through the palm in 
a beautiful curve. After the -SSth year it straightens up and 
reaches the mental mount of Mars. In its course through the 
palm it is deeply traced and long. The line denotes unusual 
intelligence and fine intellechial ability. The possessor was a 
very ramous journalist and this fact is further verified bv his 
straight Mercury finger which has a line running through all 
the phalanges. The mount of Mercury is strong and is the sign 
of success in the intellectual field. The mark of a trident on 
Mercury and Sun denotes brilliant success and unusual cele- 
brity attained in public life. He was an effective public speaker 
and a distinguished editor of an English Daily for a number 
of years. He took part in public life and ultimately rose to be a 
Minister of Education in a Province of India. 

The line of Heart with a trident at the start is the mark 
of a person who has a high ideal of duty and affection. This 
trident is the sign of fortune. 

Note the two marks resembling an arrow or spear-head on 
the mount of Jupiter, showing that the possessor would win 
success and fame. Look at the mount of Moon with hair lines 
towards the Fate Ijne denoting an active imagination. 

It should be noted that on this hand, all the lines are very 
fine denoting a CTeater fund of eneri^ than muscular strength, 
as also emotionalism which was hela in check by the sb*ength 




Fw: 58. 

■T'HE HAND OF A FAMOUS JOUJRNALIST 





PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


209 


of will denoted by the thumb, and ttie strong Mead line termi- 
nating on the Mount of upper Mars showing will and self- 
control. 

The line of Fate risQs from the wrist and in its early course 
is weak but after the 25th year, it ascends deep and clear, send- 
ing branches. A second lipe of Fate, again branched, may also 
be seen rising from below the line of Head and reaching the 
Saturn mount. • 

Look at fine lines rising from the line of Life and going up 
the palm, indicating efforts made to improve his career. The 
two lines of Fate indicate his career as a journalist and 
X^olitician. 

Note again a line from the Life line ascending to the mount 
of Sun where it becomes triple forked. This is the mark of a 
person who reaches the top of his profession and becomes 
famous. A branch from the line of Sun to the mount of Mer- 
cury indicates success as a speaker and writer. 

Branches from the lines of Fate and Head to the mount 
of Sun indicate magnificent success in his career. 

Look at the wrist, where* there is a mark of fish, the sign 
of a learned and good man. ^ 

The lines of Fate, Sun, Heart and Life have branches which 
‘assume tfie mark of a tree, a sign found on the hands of people 
who do immense good to humanity and are fortunate. 

There is a small island on the centre /)f the thumb, a mark 
denoting that the person would bfe prosperous. 

The Hand of a Famous Actress (See Fig. 59) 

The hand of this famous actress will interest the reader 
because of the following unusual signs, lines and marks: — 

1. Trident on Jiipiter, a mark of unusual celebrity. 

2. Four ascending lines found on the hand, viz., 

(a) Line of Fate from the \vrist to Saturn, unbroken and 
strong, tiirowing a branch to the Sun mount (A). 

(b) Line of Sun rising from the wri.st and reaching the 
mount of Sun, where it is associated with a star. There is also 
another star on this line between the lines of Head and Heart. 
Such a line is rarely seen on a hand and is the mark of bril- 
liant success, fortune and wealth (B). 

(c) The third line (C) reaches the mount of Saturn. 

(d) The fourth line (D) reaches the mount of Mercury. 
According to the Indian School if more than three lines are 
found on the hand, ,it is the mark of a prince. 

This actress at the height of her fame occupied a position 
in society not inferior in any way to that of a princess. 

The sign of a flag (No. 3) is another sign worth noting. 

There is the mark of a temple, with its Ijase made by m^rk 
(5) and sides formed by the lines of Life, Sun, Fate and a line 
from between the upper Mars and Moon (see No. 3, 4). At 
the top of this sign is the star. 



210 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


The line of Head rises from the mount of Jupiter and runs 
str&'ight to the mount of upper Mars where it ends in a tnple 
fork. Such a clearly traced and straight line is rarely found and 
is a mark of greatness and dramatic talents, also verified from 
the straight finger of Mercury. 



Fig. 59 

THE HAND OF A FAMOUS ACTRESS 

1. Trident on Jupiter. 2. Star on line of Sun and Sun mount. 3. Flag. 
4 Line of Head tnple forked. 5. Temple 6 Creative curve. 7 Four 
up-going lines, Fate, Sun, Mercury and from mount of Moon to Saturn. 

The mounts of Venus and Jupiter are well developed and 
denote that the possessor would attain a good social position 
and would be an amazing personality. 

Look at the line of Fate and a branch of it on Saturn, 
crossed by a small line (R). 

This is the sign of heavy misfortune in old age. 

The Hand of Fdlitician and Administrator (See Fig, 60 ), 
This is the hand of a great adihinistrator, statesman and 
orator. Ihe student will note that on his hand the finger of 


I'KACFICAL PALMISTRY 


211 


Mercury is very straight and long, so much so that it reaches the 
nail of the third finger. The mount of Mercury, the place 
wherefrom success is read is unusually developed. Hiese two 
marks combined to make the owner possess remarkable talents 
as an orator and endowed him with the gifts of organization 
and administration denoted, by a straight line of Head. 



Fic. 60. 


THE HAND OF A POLITICIAN AND ADMINISTRATOR 

1. Double line of Life. 2. More than three up-going lines. 3. Line of 
Fate branched. 4. L.ine of Sun from Life line to Sun mount. 5. Line 
of Intuition. 6. Line of Head straight with branches to Jupiter. 7. Lotus 
line or trident on Heart line. 8. Mark of fish. 9. Triangle on Sun. 

10. Mark of Capony. 

There is a second line of Life or Mars (see No. 1). This 
denotes great vitality. The line of Life indicates good health. 
There is no line of health, also a good sign. It is a fact that 
this person lived to a long age and kept quite fit right up to 
the end. 

There are more than three ascending lines on his hand. 
This shows that he. would occupy a high social position equal 
to a prince. It is true that the owner several times occupied 
the highest position in the government of his country. 

All the main lines of Head, Fate, Heart and Sun have 
branches. Hiis is the mark of tree, a sure, sign of greatness. 

The line resembling a bow on the mount of Moon denotes 
intuitional faculties possessJbd by the person (see No. 5). 

There are marks of triangles on the mount of Mercury and 


212 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Sun. On Sun it indicates fame and success in public life and 
literature. In this case it denotes outstanding success as the 
ijead of the government of a progressive state. On Mercury it 
shows oratorical powers. The owner of this hand was an orator 
of extraordinary brilliance, and he made a name in this sphere 
\yliich will not die. 

The line 'of Heart triple forked resembles a lotus, a sign, 
according to Indian writers, of greatness and attainment of posi- 
tions of power and responsibility. In his time he was a dominat- 
ing figure ill the politics of his country for over a quarter of 
cenbiry. 

Look at the mark of fish on the wrist, a sign of scholarly 
attainments. He was a brilliant scholar. 

Look at the mark of canopy. No. 10 in the illustration. This 
is the sign of a king, according to the Indian School. This is 
an unusual sign. In this case it came out to be true since the 
owner had the temper of a king and kept up the dignity of his 
office right up to the end. 

The Hand of a Famous Judge (See Fig, 61) 

The hand of this Judge is Inserted as it has some of the 
marks found on the hands of famous men and women of the 
world. I'he student must have grasped the fact that the hands, 
of all successful people of the world who attained high social 
position and celcl^rity in the world are evenly balancjed and 
the mounts are normally and harmoniously developed. The 
fingers are set on a line with the palm and are straight. The 
hand under review is broad, with a strong and long thumb. 

The line of Head with branches of Jupiter and the sign 
of canopy associated with it, the line of Fate ascending to tiie 
Jupiter rm)unt, the trident on the mount of Jupiter c'onnected 
with the Heart lino, and the line to the mount of Sun with a 
triple fork and anotlier mark ot canopy formed as shown in No. 1 
towards the end of the Heart line under Mercury, denote that 
the possessor vvovdd occupy a high social position and R post 
of res]K)nsil)ilit> and power and win fame as a judge. Tnese 
signs also show that he would be wealthy. He was a peer 
and rose to he a Chief Judge. 

His liand indicates all those qualities which make a learned 
judge, l.ook also at the sign of fish on the wrist. 

The Hand of a Famous General (See Fig. 62k 

The hand of this famous soldier who ro.se to be a general 
is inserted to illustrate the marks and signs, indicative of great 
lame and hrilliaucc. 

Look at the clear .sign of flag on the mount of Sun asso- 
ciated with the line of Sun, This is the mark of unusual and 
iVuignificent success, attained by a person on whose hand it is 
seen. The owner of this hand rose to be a general, was 
knighted and w«m the coveted distinction of the Victoria Cross 
awarded to a soldier for exceptional bravery. 



213 


PRACTICAI. PAL3^1STRY 

His success as a soldier and general is also clear from 
the line of Fate ascending to the mount of Saturn and turn- 
ing towards Jupiter. The lucky possessor of such a line wins 
a nigh social position and occupies a post in which he has the 
chance of exercising command over thousands of men. 

The mark of fish (No. 4) is the sign of a wealthy and suc- 
cessful person. 



Fic. 61. 

THE HAND OF A FAMOUS JUDGE 

1. Canopy. 2. Trident. 3. Line of Sun from L^te line to Sun mount 
v^’ith branches trident and two Parallel lines. 4. Line ot Fate ascending 
to Jupiter. 5. Fish 6. Line of Head with branches and associated with 

Canopy. 

The marks which denote his being a soldier is his line of 
Head rising from Jupiter and running across the palm to the 
upper mount of Mars. The line is aeeply traced, and is the 
sign of an ambitious, masterful person who has all the qualities 
necessary for a bom ruler of men and also an organising capa- 
city of an unusual kind. The thumb is beautifully sl^ed, with 
the nail phalange long, indicating strength of will. The line of 
Head forms a beautiful fish with a line from Life to Jupiter. 
The lower and upper mounts of Mars are strongly developed 
with a clear triangle on the lower Mount showing presence of 
mind and courage in face of danger. 

All these marks indicate conferment of honours on him. 
It is a fact that this remarkable soldier was awarded the K.C.B. 


214 


INDIAN PAZ^aSTRY 



* Fig. 62. 

THE HAND OF'a FAMOUS GENERAL 


1. Line of Fate ending at the base of Jupiter. 

2. Line of Head rising from Jupiter going down the palm deeply 

traced and well-marked. 

3. Line of Sun rising from Life line associated with a clear sign 

of flag & ending in fork on Sun mount. 

4. Fish at the wrist made by lines of Fate, Life and a branch 

from Life. 

The Hand of Another Famous General {See Fig, 63). 

The marks of greatness, brilliant success and achievements 
on the hand of tins general are the followin: — 

There are three ascending lines, of which the lines of Fate 
and Sun are characteristic, the former going to the mount of 

Jupiter and forming into a triple fork with the line of Heart, 

and the latter rising from Life line and ascending to the mount 
of Sun and becoming fofked. These lines assume the form of 
the line of tree. 

(2) Two marks of fish at the wrist may be seen, made by 
lines of Fate and Sun and Life and a branch from the Life line 
merging into the Fate line (see No. 1.). 

(3) .See the trident on Jupiter. 

■ (4) The line of Head or Dhan Rekha (No. 3) has branches 
going to Jupiter, is very clearly and ^deeply traced and ends in 
two forks, one going to the upper mount of Mars and the other 
descending to the mount of Moon. It is a fact that this remark- 


PRACnCAI. PALfbflSTRY | 21 B 

able soldier was not only a brilliant administrator and orga- 
niser, but was interested in fine arts like music to which ne 
tuned in leisure hours. 

(5) According to the Indian school the line of Fate rising 
from the wrist and ascending to Jupiter, with the mounts pt 
Mars strongly developed and the une of Head throwing bran- 
ches to Jupiter, indicates a soldier who would be a masterful 
personality and rise to be a general. 



Fig. 63. 

THE HAND OF ANOTHER FAMOUS GENERAL 

1. Fish made by lines of Life, Fate and Sun. 

2. Line of Sun from Life line to Sun mount, a sign of great success. 

3. Trident. 

4. More than three up-going lines marked A, a sign of great fortune 

and social 'position. 

5. Line of Mars — ^D. 

6. Sign of drowing — 4. 

7. Bow. 

The fingers are long and set evenly with the palm indicat- 
ing a balance of capacity. 

There is a line of Mars strengthening f^e line of Life. On 
a broad hand it is the mshrk of a soldier. 

The mark of bow is a magnificent sign of success. 


216 


INDIA^I PALMISTRY 

The Hand of One of the Greatest General of AU Time 
(See Fig. 64). 

This hand of one of the greatest military commanders of 
all time is inserted to illustrate some uncommon marks. Look 
at the mounts of Tupiter, Lower Mars and Venus which are 
veiy strong. The finger of Jupiter equals in length the second 
finger ana stands out. ©It is the sign of boundless ambi- 
tion. Another extraordinary mark which distinguishes this hand 
is the thumb which his extraordinary long so that when placed 


C 


Fic. 64. 

THE HAND OF ONE OF THE GREATEST GENERALS 
OF ALL TIMES 

1. Four up-going lines marked A denoting a Maharaja. 

2. Canopy, marked R fonned by the line of Head, a branch of the 

line of Fate, line of Life, and a line from Mars. 

3. Branches from Fate line to Jupiter and Mercury denoting success 

as General at the ag^e of 27. 

4. The finger of Jupiter as long as the second finger marked B. 

5. The finger of Mercury long and straight. 

3. Thumb long and strong. 

Three rascertes. 

8. Stars. 

by the side of the first finger it v ould go up its third phalange. 
This is the mark of a person who is endowed with enormous will 
power to translate the original and brilliant ideas^ denoted by 
nis Head line slightly sloping towards Moon, into practical 




FRACnCAL PALXflSTRY 


217 


shape. This brilliant and remarkable man was not only a gneat 
soldier and captain like Caesar or IJannibal but also a talented 
administrator and statesman who codified the laws of his 
country. 

On the hand under review there are as many as four as- 
cending lines indicating his rise to heights of human greatness 
and elevation to the supreme dignity (rf an emperor. The line 
of Fate is branched, one branch at the age ot 27 running at 
Jupiter, where you may see a star denoting that the fortunate 
owner would leap into cinusual fame and power. In this case 
it was a great military triumph which made his name ring 
throughout the world. The other branch runs to Mercury. 
This denotes brilliance of intellect and managing ability. The 
Fate line looks like a line of Tree, and is said to confer upon 
a person a princely fortune. 

If the hand is examined from the side of the thumb you 
would not fail to notice the mark of canopy so highly spoken 
of by the Hindus and which decorated tne soles of the feet 
of Lord Krishna. Tliis mark is formed by the lines of Head, a 
branch from the line of Fate banning towards Jupiter, the line 
of Fate, the Life line and a cross line from Mars to Saturn. 

, If this cross line from Lower Mars to Saturn had not run 
beyond the point of contact with the Head line, it would not 
have resulted in his phenomenal downfall. The sign of canopy 
is the mark of Raj Yoga or the ascent to •the highest ladder of 
political power, but in this case there is an inciication of Ra;-' 
bhung Yoga or the loss of kingdom and dethronement when 
a line from Mars, the seat of Enemies, crosses over to Saturn, 
the planet that brings about disaster and loss of position. 

Look at the line of Fate rising from Venus, denoting the 
fact of adverse and unfortunate relation with women. His mar- 
riage at the age of 27 marked the commencement of his eleva- 
tion to fame and power; but happiness in the married state 
did not endure and ultimately resulted in his divorcing his faith- 
ful marriage partner. 

Look at the rascettes marked with a tree line. It is a sign 
of brilliant fortune. Look at the line of opposition, marked (R) 
in the illustration, springing from Mars, cutting the Fate and 
at 46 and running to Saturn. This is the year when he lost a 
battle which terminated his career. 

The straight line of Sun on his h;}nd shows that the rising 
sign was Scorpio with Jupiter therein. In the tenth house was 
Sun associated with. Mars which was the lord of the rising sun. 
In the tenth house which had the sign of Leo, Mars and Sun 
were conjoined. 

The Hand of a Famous Poet and Author (See Fig, 65). 

Like all scholars, literary men and poets, the mounts' of 
Mercury, upper Mars and Moon on his nand are more deve- 
loped than the mount of Venus and the opjoosite side of the 
pmm. 



218 


INDIAN PALMISITIY 


• The (oUowing signs denote fame on his hand : 

1. There is a trident on the mount of Jupiter associated 
with a line rising from the line of Head. This is a mark of 
outstanding literary success. 

2. The line of Heart is triple forked. This is a sign of 
good fortune. ^ 

3. The lines of Fate, Head and Heart, being branched, 
assume the line of Tree, *a mark of greatness and good fortune. 

4. The line of Head is triple forked, clearly traced and 
rises from Jupiter, the sign of literary .talents ana a poet. 



Fig. as. 

THE HAND* OF A FAMOUS POET AND AUTHOR 
1. Trident on Jupiter. 2. Line of Heart triple forked. 3. Line of Sun 
with triple forls and branches. 4. line of F^e forked, 5. Line of Head 
triple forked. 6. Flag. 7 Fish. 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


219 


5. * The marks of flag and fish denote greatness, goodness 
and fame. 

6. Vertical lines on Moon mount indicate imaginative 
powers of a creative artist. 

The Hand of a Successful and Famous Politician and Multi- 
Millionaire (See Fig, 66). 

This hand of a very rich TOliticiaft will interest the reader 
as the palm of a very successful worldly man w’’ho made a huge 
fortune and occupied ^ veiy high position in society and took 
prominent part in the politics of his country. 

Tlie striking features of the hand are: 



Fic. 66. 

THE HAND OF A SUCCESSFUL AND FAMOUS POLITICIAN 
AND MULTI-MILLIONAIRE 

I Temple. 2, Mounts of Venus and Jupiter developed. 3. Line of Sun 
from Life line to Sun mount. 4. A line from line of Head to Jupiter. 
5. Lme of Head straight. 6. Triangle formed by the lines of Head, 

Sun and Life. 

• 

The hand is broad with all thfe mounts excellently deve- 
loped and denotes a person who would make progress in mate- 
rial affairs (See Venus) and in the social field (look at Jupiter). 
This great progress and high elevation in the material and so- 
cial sphere is made certain by the excellence, straightness and 
depth of the line of Head tnat rises slightly apart from the 
Lire line with a branch to Jupiter. The line or Head, called 
Dhan (wealth) or mother line oy ancient Hindu writers, when 
found on a broad, masterful hana with fingers all set evenly wiA 


220 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


tha palm and the finger of Mercury straight and long, shows 
that the possessor would rise to a very OTeat height financially. 
Tlie success of the possessor is indicated oy the line of Fate and 
Sun, remarkable for their points of rise and termination, the for- 
mer terminating towards Jupiter and the latter rising from the 
Life line and ending at tne base of the Sun mount. 

Look at the mark ^f a temple at the wrist and another 
formed on the Venus, marked in the fimre. This is the si^ 
of a person who would win success and fame in the material 
world! The mounts of Venus (denoting .material ego) and Jupi- 
ter (social ego) are very developed and point to a rise in tne 
social and political field through boundless ambition, organiz- 
ing capacity and tact in winning the active sympathy of the 
people about him. 

Look at the two triangles marked 6. The lower one is 
formed by the line of Head, Sun and a branch from the Life 
line and indicates clearness of intellect and intuitional powers 
as also constructive talents, all of which brought him success 
in the world. The second upper one is formed by the line of 
Fate, Sun and Heart and is the sign of unusual success through 
his magnificent and colourfuL personality. 

Look at the h'ne of Sun from the Life line to the mount . 
of Sun. This is the sign of a person who wins magnificent suc- 
cess and ascends to the top *of his profession. 

The line of Fate is merged in the line of Heart and turns 
towards Jupiter. This is the mark of a prominent career. 
The finger of Mercury is well-set, long and straight. 

Tlie hand of this famous scientist has the following marks : — 
The Hand of a Famous Scientist (See Fig, 67). 

1, The hand is broad, evenly balanced, with all the mounts 
developed, thumb strong and w^ell-shaped, and the mount of 
Moon excellently developed, h'lngers are short indicating a 
quick brain. 

2. The line of Head is remarkably well-traced, deep and 
Forked at the termination. It springs from the Jupiter mount 
and without touching the Life line sweeps through the palm. 
Tlirough his researches in the field of science the owner of this 
hand has won immortal fame, denoted by the marks of temple 
and triangle. 

Look at a Fate line rising from the line of Head and in its 
course through the palm ’turning towards Jupiter; a mark of a 
prominent career. 

On the mount of Jupiter look at the flag, a sign of fame. 
\s it is made by a Line from Head, it indicates that fame would 
be achieved through intellectual and scientific ability. Read 
diis. mark with the ^upright lines on the Mercury mount. 

The lines of Sun and Fate are forked. These are marks of 
niccess and celebrity. 

The Hand of a Famous Indian Scientist (See Fig. 68). 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


221 


The hand of this saintly scientist is inserted with a view to 
illustrating the following lines and signs: — 

The mounts of Mercury, Sun, upper Mars and Moon, de- 
noting the zone of imagination and the sub-conscious, are more 
developed than the other side of the hand, llie mount of 
Venus appears to be developed towards the side of the thumb 
denoting a purity of character. The mark of triahgle on Jupiter 
is the sign of his fame won through Intellectual ability, llie 
big triangle made by the lines of Fate, Head and Health is the 
sign of a saintly person who is competent to acquire a clear 
knowledge of the realities of human existence and the material 
universe. This is also a mark of creative talents. There are 
more than two marks of fish denoting scholarship, goodness of 
heart and honours coming to the owner even in old age. 



THE HAND OF A FAMOUjS SCIENTIST 

1. Hand broad. 

2. Mercury finger straight and long. 

3. Line of Head remarkable for its length, and shape and fork at 

the end. 

4. Line of Fate turned towards Jupiter. 

5. Temple. Line of Sun forked. 

6. Triangle. 

7. Line of Heart triple forked. 

There are more than two ascending lines which indicate the 
magnificent social status attained by nim. Both the lines of 

S 16 



223 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Fate and Sun are Well-marked and forked. They and the line 
of ‘Heart beine branched show that the owner had the mark 
of a tree whira is considered a fortunate sign to have. 

The line of Heart is triple forked, one fork of which is 
tnade by the line of Fate. In his case idealistic love was pre- 
sent and sex energy was transmuted and used in the service 
of science and his countiy. This is verified by the presence 
of the mark of triangle oil the Venus mount. This remark^le man 
dedicated his life to the cause of science and education and the 
good of his mother-land and led a life of celibacy throughout. 

Look at the mark of an island or Yav in the centre of the 
thumb denoting that possessor was an honour to his race, family 
and country. 

There are several marks of fish with heads turned ^ward 
and downward, similar to those found on the hand of lagore, 
denoting honours coming to a person in earlier life and ad- 
vanced age. 



Fig. 08. 

THE HAND OF A FAMOUS INDIAN SCIENTIST 
The Hand of a Self-Made Millionaire (See Fig. 69). 

The* hand of this self-made millionaire is given to illustrate 
the signs denoting *his business ability and success in growing 
rich. It may be stated that about 13 years ago he was only a 
primary teacher on a small salary of Rs. 20/-. 




Fic. 69. 

THE HAND OF A SELF-MADE MILLIONAIRE 




l-ic. 70. 

THt: ham; A CIOVKHNMhlN l OKFICtR 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


223 


Business Talents'. 

1. The mount of Mercur>^ is developed and inclined to- 
wards the percussion side. The finger of Mercury with its 
second phalange, indicating business talents, is long. 

2. The line of Head, slightly joined to the line of Life, 
runs straight and evenly through the palm, ending in a triple 
fork. 

3. The fingers are set evenly on the palm a sign of for- 
tune and a well-balanced nature. 

Indication of Wealth. 

1. The line of Fate is strong and forked at the termina- 
tion one fork being inclined towards Jupiter. 

2. The line of Sun is forked at the end, one fork inclined 
towards the Mercury mount. It rises at about the 27th year 
and is connected with an influence from Moon. The person 
made money by foreign exports. Moon governing the sea. 

3. The line of Heart is associated with a trident, made 
with the fate line, forked and inclined to Jupiter. This shows 
that the person is a child of fortune. Look at a small triangle 
connected with the line of Heart touching tlie hne of Sun and 
under the finger of Sun and line of Heart. This shows the cons- 
fruction of a house and acquisition of landed property. 

The Hand of a Government* officer (See Fig, 70) 

This hand bears the foDowing marks and events: — 

All the mounts are well developed. This man is a mate- 
rialist. The mount of Moon is far weaker in development than 
the Venus mount and therefore zone of imagination is deficient. 
The line of Head is clearly and evenly marked on the hand 
indicating intelligence and mental ability. 

Look at the mount of Moon where there is a big cross. 
The man had danger from water. He miraculously escaj^ed 
death by drowning at the age of 21, 26 and 38. When he was 
21 years old, he had entered the river Jumna for a bath, and 
was carried away by a strong current for a mile, and was saved 
in a wonderful way. At the age of 38, he fell into a septic tank 
and by sheer good fortune escaped death. 

Look at the line from Venus to Moon. This indicates a 
craving for drugs. 

Look at the two lines of success rising from the line of Life 
to Jupiter and Saturn indicating outstanding success. The man 
made a lot of money in a business venture at the age of 21. 

At the aee of 26, marked on the line of Fate, see a branch 
of the Fate line going up. At that time he entered govern- 
ment service as an Income Tax Oflicer. 

Look at the Life line marked with a star enclosed in a 
square. He met with a motor accident. The car he ^yas travel- 
ling in got smashed, yet he escaped miraculously, llie square 



224 


INDIAN P.U.MISTnY 


proved a sign of pi^eserv'ation in his case. This happened when 
he was 35. 

Look at the line from Heart to Head cutting the Fate line 
at the age of 36. lliis denotes the death of his wife. 

Look at the line of influence rising from Life line to Venus 
denoting maniage, whicli came off at the age of 26 after the 
motor crash. ‘ 

There is 'a star on the mount of Sun. The man would make 
money and be rich, but he is not likely to attain peace of mind. 

The Hand of a Station Master (See Fig, 71). 

The hand has few lines and tliese are well traced and 
marked. The lines of Life, Head and Heart denote a healthy 
carefree indiyidiial with a very affectionate disposition. The 
line of Fate is shadowy in the beginning, becomes deeper after 
the 35th year. Look at it after it moves up the hand above 
the Head line. 

Look at the line of Success rising from the Life line and 
ascending the hand. Fix a point on the fate line by drawing 
a staight line from the point of contact to it. This was the 
27th year, after which his career began to be better. The line 
of Sun is not marked. It appears rising from the fate line at 
about the age of 52 and is merged in the line of Sun which 
is present on the mount only. This denotes that the person 
made money at that age. ‘It is a fact that the station master, 
as a result of the second wprld war conditions, amassed a few 
thousand rupees. 

Very few cross lines are, seen coming from the side of 
Venus and Mars to the other side of the hand, denoting thereby 
that the worries of human existence did not trouble him and he 
did not allow personal considerations and emotions to interfere 
with the cairn and peaceful course of life. He led a life of 
peace, rare in this aisturbed age. 

Now we have some illustrations of the events in the lives 
of persons whose hands I happened to read. They will enable 
the student to learn to interpret signs and lines and fix time 
on the palm. 

The Hand of a Man (See Fig. 72). 

Look at the line (marked 1-2) cut by a cross, from where a 
line mils to the mount of Saturn (3-4). Line 1-2 denotes the 
death of a close relative and the second line shows that the 
person at die age of 26 Vepeived property and money. 

Look at the influence line rising from the Life Kne at the 
age of 28. He married then and his married life lasted 14 years. 
See the star on the influence line, indicating the death of his 
wife when he was 42. This event is verified oy a line from the 
Heart to the Head line at 42. Read time on the line of Fate. 

Look at the liYie of Life broken and enclosed by a souare. 
Tliis event is read at the 3Ist year, when he had a severe illness 
from which he recovered wit6 difficulty. 






PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


225 


Look at the 38th year marked with a worry line from the 
base of the thumb. It is islanded and crosses through the hand 
on the mental mount of Mars, where it becomes mixed up with 
small lines, indicating that a man of a disgraceful character be- 
longing to his family circle worried him and brought him into 
disrepute and litigation (see 7-8). 

The Hand of a Woman Fig. 73). 

Look at the line of Life islanded up to the 13th year, after 
which it becomes stronger and well marked. This shows weak 
liealth and delicate childhood up to the 13th year, after which 
she regains health. 

Look at a line of Success at the age of 16 from the Life 
line to Saturn and Jupiter and a Marriage line clearly marked on 
Mercury. This indicated marriage to a young man of a pros- 
perous family (see lines AB and AC). 



Frc. 72. Fio. 73. 


THE HAND OF A MAN WOMAN'S HAND 

Look at the Life line at the 25th year cut in two parts- and a 
star on the line of Health as it crosses the Head line, the break 
enclosed by a square. These signs denoted the birth of a child 
after operation. 

Look at line (B) cut by a cross (see E). This denoted the 
death of a relative when she was 30 years old. 

Mans Hand (See Fig. 74). 

The hand of this man has the following events marked. At 
the age of 21, a line becomes merged bn the line of Head with a 
star, me line having' a small cross. The sign indicates the death 
of a woman friend which shocked him. The year of the event 
is read at the line of Life. 

Look at line 3-4 rising from the Life line, indicating mar- 
riage at the age of 28. See death cross on* the influence line 
(3-4). 

Line 1-2 is tbe influence of a cousin lasting ail dirough 

life. 



226 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


, Line C-D indicates another marriage at the ace of 49 whicl 
brought him success and the Fate une towards Sun moun 
points to the same fact (G-H). 

Look at the star on the line of Fate at 58. This shows los: 
of money. The line of Sun is islanded and starred. Loss of posi 
tlon and disgrace came to the subject through a dishonourabb 
person indicated by an jslanded line from the side of the line o 
Life. 

4. The Hand of n Business Man (See Fig. 75). 

'rhis is the hand of business man’who received no forma 
schooling hut had a practical mentality from the very begin 
ning. See tlic line of Head, straight and rising away from lin( 
of life. Note lines ascending to Jupiter, denoting ambition anc 
enterprise. Look at tlie line C-D going towards Jupiter. Thij 
shows a great success in a business venture. 



Fig. 71 Fig. 75 

MAN'S HAND BUSINESS MAN’S HAND 


Look at the worry line crossing the P’ate line and cuttinj 
it at the age of 33. This indicated a great oiiposition fron 
people outside his family circle and involved a loss of Rs. 40,00C 
"Hie finger of Mercury is long and denotes *that the person use< 
people and circiinTstances for his personal gain. He had to pa; 
a huge sum to the Government in the sliape of income ta: 
which prc\ iously by manipulation of accounts he had avoidec 
paying and which pn arcount of the opposition and reports of hi 
partners he was forced to do. 

Look at a worry line cutting the Fate line at 35. Thi 
showed another financial loss. 



PRACnCAL PALMISTRY* 


227 


Look at the lines of Fat^^ and Sun which are eood from * 
the 36th year onwards until at the age of 47 both became is- 
landed. They indicate financial loss and luxurious and profli- 
gate ways of life. Beyond the lines are good signs indicating 
success and prosperity. 

5. The Hand of a Man (See Fig. 76). 

Look at the lines of Life and Head running together at 
the commencement. Note a line rising to Jupiter at 19. These 
marks denote that up to the age of 19 he did not work on his 
own resTOnsibility and ’with confidence. At 19 he grew ambi- 
tious and began to chalk out a career for himself. 



Fic. 76. Fic. 77. 

MAN'S HAND THE HAND OF A MAN 


Look at the line of Fate and lines of opposition (2-3) (3-3) 
and (4-4) crossing kt the age of 22, 24 and 26. The person was 
held back in his career by people who obstructed his path and 
he was put to worry ana monetary loss. 

Look at a small line rising from the Life line at 28. It was 
an attempt to go up; but as the line does not appear to advance 
beyond the Head line, it indicates ‘that the person could not 
achieve success because of a mental miscalculation. The fact 
is that the person was offered a job which was quite good, but 
as he thought he would be able lo get a better one he rejected 
the offer with the result that a good chance was missed. 

The line of Fate is broken at 33. This* is another set-back 
in the career. 

From the 33rd up to 35th year he .struggled on. Look at 
the line of Fate stopped at the Head line. 


228 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Look at two lines of Fate. One Fate line is inclined to 
Tupiter. The man organized two business schemes by dint of 
his mental ability ana was very successful and prosperous. 

Note branches from the second line of Fate to Sun at the 
ages of 44 and 50. These indicate unexpected successes and 
gains at the ages indicated. 

Look at two cross lipes from Heart to Head, one at 35 and 
the other at 43 read on Fate line and Marriage line on Venus 
cut by death across D. These indicated loss of marriage part- 
ner at 35, and a very severe illness of the second wife from 
which she escaped but became a physical wreck so that sexual 
connections with her were over. Look at the influence line on 
Venus marked with a Star enclosed by a square and the line 
going beyond it. The married life ran on. 

Look at the mount of Moon with a cross. He escaped 
drowning twice. Double lines of Life are found. 

I^ook at the Heart and Life lines islanded. He had deli- 
cacy of heart and eyes lasting from his 47th to 52nd year, after 
which he recovered and lived to be quite old. At the 67th year 
his vitality began to grow less; note the line of Life tasselled. 

Look at the upright line on the Marriage line and a big 
island at the base of the thumb. This shows a remarkably’* 
successful son. * 

Mans Hand (See Fig. 77). 

The hand of this man had some abnormal lines indicating 
important events. , 

Look at the line of Life stopping after the 19th year. It is 
crossed by an islanded line from lower Mars. The line of Life 
is seen commencing from the line of Head and ringing the 
mount of Venus. These marks indicated the following events* 

This man was troubled because of a dishonourable person 
so that he felt insulted. He left the place and started life at 20 
under a new name and under entirely different circumstances. 

Look at the influence line springing from the Life line at 
23 and the Marriage line on the Mercury mount. This denoted 
that his married life lasted up to the age of 52. Note the death 
cross on the influence line and the Marriage line curving on the 
Heart line. 

Look at line B-B rising from Moon and joining the Fate 
line at the age of 34. 'Hii? was the year w'hen he was helped 
by a person unconnected with his family. 

Look at the line of Fate crossed by small lines afjove the 
Head line. These denoted interferences with his fate and mo- 
netary loss. The years were 38th and 30th, Look at the islanded 
Fate linfe, denoting financial difficulties from the 43rd to the 
46fh year. This sign also showed illicit connections with a 
woman ruining his career brin^g him losses. 

Look at uie line A-A coming from the family line at the 
base of the thumb and ending on the mental mount of Mars. 





Fk:. 78, 

TJIF I VFT HAVn HP a urnk4AKi 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY . 


229 


This denoted a troublesome law suit broilght against him by 
a relative at the age of 39. Read the year on Life line. 

Look at line A-R. This also denotes the death of a rela- 
tive when he was 65 years old. This death was caused by 
drowning indicated by the star on the Moon mount. 

The Left Hand of a Woman (See Fig. 78). 

This imprint of the left hand of a woman will interest tlie 
student because of the following lines and marks: — 

The main lines of JHead and Life are clearly marked, indi- 
cating good health and a clever brain. The line of Head is 
slightly joined to line of Life at fhe commencement, showing 
independence of mentality. The fingers are all conical, with 
the finger of Sun quite strong. The mount of Venus is full and 
if read with the line of Heart with lines rising and running 
<lownward towards the Head line and mount of Venus, tlenotes 
that the personals dominated by a strong sexual urge. Look at 
the islanded line of Fate right up to the line of Head indicating 
that she would have illicit connections with taen and earn a 
had name and would be looked upon as a notorious woman. It 
IS a fact that this woman had allowed herself to be used by 
men. 

lier domestic life was not happy. Look at the branches 
from the line of Heart curving on^ the line of Head. 

Look at an islanded line from the base of the tliumb touch- 
ing her Life line at the 23rd year* This was the bad influence 
of a relative owing to which she was dishonoured. 

Look at the Marriage liii^s which are more than one on 
Mercury. Similarly there is an influence rising from Life line 
and ending by being cut by another small line. This was a 
c omicction with a man at her 16th year, which lasted for about 
six years. Note the place where it is finished. Just from a 
place near it another line rises and runs down the mount, but 
later on at the age of 40 it ends. This indicated a marriage 
which lasted up to that time after which the person passed out 
of her life. Note worry lines crossing and cutting from the 
side of the thumb. 

Look at small lines rising from inside the Life line at the 
35th and 38th years and running towards Venus. These indi- 
cate friendship with men. 

Look at the two lines of Fate running parallel, as also the 
line of Sun. These indicate that "the woman would lead an 
easy and prosperous life from a material standpoint, money 
coming to her husband through running two kinds of businesses. 

Look at several lines running from the line of Heart down 
towards the mount of Venus. These lines denote that at the 33rd, 
38th and 45th years she had worries caused by her love affairs. 

Look at the big island commencing at about her Fate 
line, crossing Head and Sun lines and ending at the Heart line. 



230 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


This sign is connected with a line of Friendship on Venus 
mount. The dishonour and scandal was brought about by her 
friendship with a man. Locate time of the event on the Fate 
line at tne 38th year. The friendship commenced when she 
was 32 years old and grew deeper as she attained her SStb 
ye^ar. 

The whole hand is marked with criss-cross lines in the 
centre of the palm indicating an unpeaceful life. 

The student by an examination of the mounts and lines 
should rome to the conclusion that the subject must be an at- 
tractive woman with a lot of personal charm and magnetism to 
draw men to her side. The lingors indicate an emotional and 
impressionable nature which can be played upon by any prac- 
tised libertine. 

Look at a line from Moon merging her line of Fate when 
she was 26 years of age. This indicates that a person entered 
her life. After this time from the 29th to the 30th year the 
Fate line is seen islanded indicating some financial difficulties, 
but the indications point to the fact that she was exposed to 
the advances and temptation of the opposite sex. 

’^The thumb should be examined. It was fairly stiff. Some- 
times this woman exercised will power, and escapea being roped • 
in by sensually disposed men who were moved by baser pas- 
sions. 

The Hand of a Rich and 'Domestically Unhappy Womar 
{See Fig, 79) 

This is the hand of a rich 'woman occupying an enviable 
social position but very much troubled because of her unfortu- 
nate domestic circumstances. 

The student's attention is drawn to the following marks and 
lines on her hand which arc characteristic. 

Both the hands were quite long and large. The lingers 
\vere fairly evenly set on the palm, long and conically shaped 
indicating a luc'ky and wealthy person with an emotional and 
in *pressionablc nature moved by an impulse to move in society 
and be admired for her good looks. 

The striking marks on her hand are the lines of Heart and 
\ lead. 

I.ook at the line of Heart set lower on the palm and deeper 
and strongcT than the line ©f Head which is weak. The emo- 
tional and affectionate nature of this woman, dominated her in- 
tellectual, calculativc and common sense side so that she allowed 
the former to get the l>etter of her. The branches from the 
line of Heart are seen cur\ung on to the Head and Life lines 
denoting that she would meet with disappointments in affection 
and would be moved by the sexual and physical side of her 
nature. Tliis passionate side of her love is also mingled and 
toned down by the idealistic view, generated by the line of 



PRACTICAL PAL^^ISTHY 231 

Heart starting with* a wide fork on the Juipiter mount (see a-a 
and a-b). • 

Look at the line of Head which starts from the lower 
mount of Mars. As it runs through the hand it is .split in two 
parts, and then it goes further. At the point of termination, it 



THE HAND OF A RICH AND DOMESTICALLY UNHAPPY WOMAN 

is cut by a line from the side of thfe \)ase of the thumb. Tin’s 
has small branches rising to Jupiter. The kind of Head line 
as explained elsewhere belongs to a woman who is disposed 
to rule, but owing to a weak head and lack of good sense 
makes the life of the husband and those around her difficult 
and sometimes impossible. The sign in . no way makes .for 
domestic happinef^s. Read this sign in conjunction with the 
line of Heart, and the cohclusion you would come to is clear : 
that there would rift in the affections. There would be 



232 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


violent and unhappy- scenes with the husband. The line of Mar- 
riage on this hand is forked leading to the conclusion that 
there would be virtual separation from the husband. It is a fac^ 
that this rich woman was married to a big man owning pro- 
perty worth lakhs. Verify the fact by looking at the strong 
lines of Fate and Sun on her hand .denoting wealth and posi- 
tion of the husband. After a married life extending over a few 
years, there were disagreements and bitter domestic disappoint- 
ments and lack of love between the husband and the wife led 
her to make love to and come into contact with other men. Her 
emotionalism and impressionable love riature made her a prey 
to advances from other men. Look at the influence line (H-G) 
denoting her husband moving away from the Life line. Look 
at another line of friendship ^-N) rising from the Life line at 
32, and a similar islanded line from Moon towards the Fate 
line at the same age. This denoted the deep influence of a man 
on her life, iwhich proved to be scandalous. Look at the line 
of opposition above this influence line connecting with the line 
of friendship. This worry related to her friendship and con- 
nection with the man at the age^of 33. Read this event on the 
Fate line. 

Look at the Life line looking weaker after this friendly and 
intimate connections with the new man. The health deterio-*^ 
rated because of constant Ijickerings with her husband. This 
led to a separation between the two. But they occupied the 
same house. Look at U line of vitality (Z) meeting the Fate line. 
This denoted better health after the 37th year. 

Look at the lines of worry /connected with the Family line 
on the base of the thumb crossing the Life, Fate and Head 
lines and touching the Heart line. These worries related to the 
future of her child and affairs connected therewith as also 
financial difficulties consequent on law suits arising out of the 
property of her husband. The fact of the matter was that she 
never felt happy, and if at all she had moments of relief, they 
related to her connection with the friend who entered her life 
at 31. But this was disliked by her marriage partner. 

Look at the line O-P crossing from the' line of Heart to 
the Head line. This line indicates a domestic bereavement and 
in most cases the death of the marriage partner. In this case it 
was a break in the married state, although not the death of the 
husband. This did not blast her fate. Look at the Fate line 
going up the hand. This happened at 43. Read this date on 
the Fate line where it is cut by this sign. 

This cross* liiie connects the Head and tieart lines. After a 
few yeats, the health began to deteriorate again. Look at the 
Heart line and lower mount of Moon for the disorder. Owing 
to a disorder in the sexual system there was a delicacy of health 
and her heart was Also affected and made h6r bed-ridden. This 
disorder she conquered and lived up* to the 60th year. Look 
at the islanded line of Life for the weakness of health. 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY . 


233 


The Hand of a Rich Marwati Business Man {See Fig, 80) 
This hand of a Marwari millionaire of a state in Rajputana 
will interest the reader, as it bears marks which denote that he 
would rise from poverty to wealth. 

The original hand, of which the imprint is but a reproduc- 
tion of the main lines and important signs, was founa to be 
fairly large and masterful with a long well-shaped thumb 
denoting stren^h of will. The fingers were of medium length 
and w^l devdoped, showing uncommon ability to carry out 
ideas denoted by the beautiful, strong, deeply traced and fault- 
less line of Head taking its rise from the Jupiter mount indi- 
cative of boundless anmition and drive. This sign was rein- 
forced and backed up by the strength and length of the 
Mercury finger. The Mercury mount denoted business ability 
and perceptive and practical talents of a high order. Look at 



Fic. 80. 

THE HAND OF A MARWARI BUSINESS MAN 


1. Line of Heart triple forked. 

2. Line A G is the line of Sun. 

3. Line E D to Jupiter. 

4. Line of Fate GR to Saturn. 

5. Mark H temple. 

6. Mark Crocodile. 


the line of Fate rising from the line of Lifn at about the 28th 
year and ascending to the second finger without faltering. This 
Fate line denotes that the person would follow his ancestral 


234 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


profession and make* a career by his merit. This came out to 'be 
trufe, as the Seth started on a small salary of Rs. 35/- as an 
accountant to a business man. His fate did not shine and 
prosperity and success did not come to him till his 35th year 
was passed. Note the line of success and a second line of Fate 
rising from the Head line. The line of Success is very clear 
and boldly marked and shows unusual success through the 
mental qualities of the subject. It is a fact that the Seth work- 
ed cleverly and gave ample and abundant proof of his business 
ability to merit a fortune. Look at the second line of Fate as- 
cending up the hand and after crossing the Heart line turning 
towards the Jupiter finger. This is an infallible sign of brilliant 
success, attainment of prominence, amassing of a fortune and 
winning a good social position This Seth earned several mil- 
lions, and now occupies a social position of dignity among his 
brother millionaires. 

Look at the beautiful trident made by the two lines of 
Fate and line of Heart. This is the sign of an extraordinarily 
fortunate man who owns fat bank balances, motor cars and 
palatial buildings. ^ 



Fic. 81. 

THE HAND OF A MURDERER 

1. Line of Heart short and islanded. 

2. Line of Head short and rLsiiig fron? Mars mount. 
8. Ring of Saturn. 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


285 


Look at the sign' of temple formed by the lines of Fate and 
a cross line from the Fate line to the Head line (mark H). This 
is also a sign of wealth and good fortune. 

Look at the island in the centre of the thumb. This denotes 
wealth and fortune. Iiispite of being uneducated this Seth is 
very rich and holds a very high social position. 

The Hand of a Murderer (See Fig. 81) 

This is the hand of an American who was called the 
"prison Demon" owing to his cunningness, blood thirstiness 
and absence of all finer human feelings. 

Look at the short line of Heart rising from a point exactly 
under the mount of Saturn. The line is islanded and a brancn 
of it cuts through the line of Head in its downward course 
through the hand as it runs to the lower mount of Mars. 

Look at the line of Head rising from the lower mount of 
Mars and stopping in the centre of the hand. 

These signs when interpreted denote a person dominated 
by the planets of Saturn and Mars. The line of Heart denotes 
a Saturnian who is very selfish and heartless. This is indicated 
by the Heart line being chained.* A branch of this line runs 
-to the lower Mars making the person influenced by Mars, and 
that is why this man was moved by murderous tendencies. The 
combination of Mars and Saturn and their malignant influence 
on the affectionate side of human heings *is very ominous and 
persons with the sign prove a curse to the human race. 

The shortnes of the line of Head denotes a materialistic 
person. 

Another mark of criminality is the ring of Saturn making a 
semi-circle from the base of the edge of the first finger to the 
base of the third finger. This mark intensifies mental and 
affectionate traits found in a person. In the case of this man, 
his criminal tendencies become accentuated. 

The finger of Mercury is long and denotes a clever person. 
His mental qualities were used for criminal purposes. 

Appendix A. 

THE BEARING OF NUMEROLOGY ON PALMISTRY 

In Chapter XXI of the book in the analysis of the right 
hand of the author we demonstrated*how in reading time of 
events on the hand. a student can be assisted by a clear know- 
ledge of the significance of numbers. We indicated that the 
figures of tihe date of birth according to the English calendar if 
added would give us the destiny number, and since numbers 
are assigned to the planets a connection bgtween numerology 
and astrology is estaolished. It is a well-known fact accepted 
by many sraolars especially the Hindu Masters of this science, 
that astroloirv and oalmistrv are closelv related and that on the 



236 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


hand may be read the horoscope cast by Nature similar to the 
one cast oy an astrologer with the time, place and date of Birth. 

Let us now give the numbers assigned to the planets. 

Sun 1, Moon 2, Jupiter 3, Uranus 4, Mercury 5, Venus 6, 
Neptune 7, Saturn 8, Mars 9. 

O stands for Eternity, Immensity and the Infinite. It refers 
to the infinitely great apd infintely small, the Boundless Being 
known in Hindu metaphysics as the Nirgun Brahman^ the uni- 
versal spirit, the first cause from whom sprang in the beginning 
of this cycle of evolution and manifestation of the universe, the 
Sun-God represented by number one, which is the symbol of 
the manifest deity who came forth from the Infinitude. This 
was the light that shone in the darkness of the worlds great 
night, called by the Hindu philosophers as Brahma’s Night, just 
as the fact of manifestation is called Brahma’s Day. 

For the edification of the student we shall give a brief but 
clear account of how the figures of the date of oirth should be 
added to find out the destiny number, as also what the num- 
bers stand for. ^ 

In order to find the fate number the date of birth should 
be used as follows: — 

Suppose the date of birth is 14-11-1904. Add as* 
1-4-1-1-1-9-4=21=3. Thus 8 is the destiny number. Take an- 
other case 28-10-1897=2-8-1-0-1-8-9-7=36=9. Tlius 9 is the 
destiny number. The figures in the date of birth refer to the 
sort or character a person has, since the influence of the planets 
in the shaping of the character •represented by the numbers can 
be estimated and the destiny number refers to the fate of the 
individual or the path of life on which he would walk. It should 
be clearly understood that the numbers derived from the 
figures of the day in a date of birth are more powerful than those 
found in the month and year, as the former arc more speci- 
fically the individual’s property than those of the month and 
year, which are, so to speak, the common property of thousands. 

It should also be noted that 10 is always reduced to 1, but 
when it is found in the figures of the biith date itself the 
nought has a special importance since it shows the person is 
likely to attain publicity. 

It should also be clearly understood that no number or set 
of numbers is good or bad, for what matters is not what 
figures you have, but what use in life you make of them, al- 
though this use depends upon the station, of life a person is 
bom in and the educational and environmental conditions to 
which he is liable to be subject. Sometimes it so happens that 
in a date of birth a whole department of figures is absent, and 
in such a case the possessor should tiy to mn his life in the 
direction in which ‘his abilities point, tor he should remember 
that great and big things were done ‘by those who were called 
upon to fight the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. 



PRACnCAl* PWMfSniY .. 


237 


Now we give below the destiny numbers and their harmo- 
nies as given by Dr. Unite Cross in his book Psychology of 
Fate. 


Destiny 

number 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 


Harmonics 

3, 5, 7. 

4. 8. 

6, 9, 1, 5, 7 

2 , 8 . 

1, 3, 7. 

3, 9. 

1, 3. 5. 

2, 4. 

3, 6. 


If and when the destiny number calculated according to 
the birth date is the saine as the number of the year, it should 
be concluded that the year would prove memorable. Besides 
if the number of the year corresponds with one of the chief 
harmonics of the destiny number, even then the year would be 
important one. The attention of the student is drawn to obser- 
vations regarding numerology bearing on events of life made 
'in the analysis of the hands of the author. 


For the guidance of the student a table of destiny years 
is given : — 


TABLE OF DESTINY YEARS. 
123456789 
1918 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925 1926 


The table thus given would enable the student to find out 
the destiny year by adding the figures of the year and reducing 
the result to a single number. Take 1926, the total comes to 
18, which further reduced comes to 9. Nine will be the destiny 
number of the year. 

Any date in <he destiny year vibrating harmoniously with 
the fate number, the total of which comes to be the same as the 
destiny number of the individual, would be considered very 
immrtant. As a matter of fact diis date would be memorable 
in nis career if he does anything which related to his profes- 
sion. As for example, the date ot bjith of a person is .4-8-1904. 
The destiny number calculated is 8. He starts a factory in 
19^, die destiny number 4 of which vibrates favourably with 
8. It the date on wluch diis step is taken is work 

undertaken would become successful as die desony number of 
die (Ute is 8.^ 

Table showing favouinble vibrations of the destiny num* 
bers widi die days and dates of months (as given in Dr. Cronfs 
book). 

3 17 



238 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


Fate No. 


Favourable & Memorable Dates 
of a Month 

1 


1, 10, 19, 28. 

2 


2, 4, 8, 11, 16, 20. 

3 


3, 6, 9, 12, 15, 18, 21, 24, 27, 30, 

4 


2, 4,' 8, 13, 16, 20, 22, 26, 31. 

5 


5, 10, 14, 19, 23. 25, 28. 

6 


6, 9. 15, 18, 24. 

7 


7, 14. 16, 25, 28. 

8 


2, 4, 8, 16, 17, 20, 22, 26, 31. 

9 

••• 

3, 16, 12, 15, 18, 21. 24. 27. 


On llie basis of experience it is stated for the guidance of 
th(‘ student that as iar as the figures of the last century are 
concernetl, lliere is no mistake in arriving at correct conclusions, 
since ^igure^ I and 8 if added brings the total to nine, a figure 
whiclj is not accounted for in reducing figures to a single digit. 
But in the case of those bom in the 20th Century, it makes a 
world of difference, since figures 1 and 9 adds 1 to the num- 
ber calculated. Take for instanc^i the date 28-6-1922. If all the 
numbers are added the destiny number is 3. But it 1 and 9 in 
the year are left out, the fate number comes to 2. Again it 
the person was bom between 12 midnight and 12 noon, there* 
would be a difference in th^, fate number it the previous dale 
is taken into calculation. Suppose a person was bom on 
28-6-1922 at 7 A.M. The date would not be 28th but 27-6-1922, 
and the fate numbers would be 2 and 1 according as the figures 
1 and 9 in the year of birth ai^ taken into calculation or not» 
In my long experience of practising numerology, I have found 
all the three numbers playing their part. This is a matter 
which requires further research and the student is advised not 
to be disappointed in case he fails to arrive at correct conclu- 
sions by following one inelhuJ. He .should make use of all, and 
talk of the future on the strength of his intuitional powers. The 
fact of the matter is that palmists and astrologers like poets are 
seldom made, but it is also true that under the direction of strong 
will power, a student not specially gifted Would develop his 
intuitional faculties or prophetic vision or what we call the sixth 
sense which brings us into closer touch with the Divine Intel- 
ligence of which we are a part and a spark. 

Indications of the Destiny 'Numbers, For the informa- 
tion and gtjidance of the* student we shall now deal with the 
main indications of the nine numbers representing the nine 
planets. All these planets are represented on the hand and 
nave a place in the horoscope of a person when cast in accord- 
ance with time, place and date of birth. The figures contained 
in a birtfi date refej- to planets the relative strengths of which 
can be jiidced from an examination of the hand. The date of 
birth and its figures would, therefore,* help the student in esti- 
mating the character of the person and reading events and their 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


239 


dates, and when done, he should find out If these can be rpad 
and verified from the hand. In this connection 1 can confident- 
ly say that the method has worked successfully in my hand 
and if properly and intelligently used, there is no reason why 
the student should fail. But persistence and patience in the 
pursuit are important and mecessary. 

Of the numbers from 1 to 9, a dassification according to 
their indications has been made by Ur. Cross which is given 
below. 

(1) Spiritual & Mental numbers are 3, 6, 9. 

(2) Emotional are 2, 5, 8. 

(3) the Physical and Material are 1, 4, 7. 

A zero found in a birth date, is very important as it in- 
creases the value of the figure graph and strengthens it. As 
already stated it has a signification of publicity and indicates 
fame and name tor its lucky possessor. 

Indications of Number 3. 

Number 3 refers to the planet Jupiter which is considered 
by Hindu writers on astrology ^s the guru or teacher of the 
planets. It is believed that the planets are not mere spheres 
"made of matter, but each of them is presided over by a spirit 
which pervades them as God perirneates through the whole uni- 
verse, and as our soul does with respect \o our physical frame. 
Hence when Jupiter governs the dfestiny of a person it does not 
confer any great material fortune since this presiding spirit is 
regarded to be a Brahmin and^a true Brahmin has nothing to 
do with material matters. That is why a famous authority on 
numerology Kelland asserts that three is a difficult figure and 
not in any way fortunate. When three is the fate number, the 
life would exhibit many tliomy and difficult places, the three 
showing up at times its full occult significance as fire. For this 
reason the thirties of any life are usually very trying. That 
is why I very seldom found the lines indicating age from the 
30th to the 39th ^ear marked favourably and not indicating 
impediments, although after the 33rd year and especially after 
the 36th year, the lire began to show improvement as indicated 
by the lines on the palm. The student should here note that 
up to the 32nd year Mercury even if favourable does not help, 
and in the same way up to the 35th year Saturn does not, even 
if strong and favourable on the hand,* exercise a steadying and 
fortunate influence; ^and if Mercury and Saturn are found to be 
weak and unfavourable, Jupiter would right up to the 35th 
year tend to make the life of a person tempestuous and 
troubled. 

Number 3 if found in a birth date tends towards intel- 
lectual advancement; and .hence are made the best of teachers 
and academic leaders and theologians. They are moved 
excellent intellectual aspirations undisfigured by grasping am 

s 18 



240 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


gabbing material tendencies. Number 3 people are marked 
by possession of originality and independence of thought, and 
a refinement and excellence in the mental sphere. They should, 
however, be placed comfortably to permit them to develop 
their intellectual powers. Editors, literary critics and essayists 
have this nuniber in their date of birth. These people are 
generally neatiy and expensively dressed and exhibit a nice 
taste so far as the adorhment of their environment and them- 
selves is concerned. If a woman has a three in her birth date, 
she would occupy a position of responsibility in the religious or 
educational sphere. She would also give proof of being an 
honourable and c'onscieiitious person. It should be noted that 
this number has a great spiritual importance. 

If Jupiter is favourable on the hand, the good qualities 
detailed above would be in evidence, but if it is unfavourably 
marked, it indicates an over-bearing, vain, intolerant, and ty- 
rannical sort of person moved by an overvaulting ambition 
leading liim to his doom. In appearance these people are 
handsome and bear a respectable and intellectual look. They 
are also conventional and orthodox. 

Cheasley in his book on numerology says that if the des- 
tiny number, which he calls the path of life, is 3, its purpose in, 
fife will be self-expression and its watch-word patience. 

Sepharial in his small book on fortune telling by numbers 
gives the following Which we note for the edification of the 
student : 

3 Jupiter, increase, expansion, hopefulness, confidence, 
buoyancy, aptitude, generosity or extravagance, nobility or 
pomposity according to the degree of intelligence enjoyed, 
riches, productiveness, fulness and success. 

Indicatiov.fi of 'Number 6. 

Number six refers to planet Venus and on the hand it 
relates to the mount situated between the line of Life and the 
base of the thumb. Hindu writers call Venus the mru of the 
Asuras as Jupiter is the guru of the Devlts. While Jupiter 
inclines a person to spiritual values of life, Venus gives a strain 
of love of the good things of life, and that is why number 6 in 
the date of birth is regarded as a source of improvement of 
every otlier figure found therein. Tliis explains the fact that 
under its influence stability, is added to the life. It is a good 
figure to have, but if repeated more than once, it becomes bad 
for the ner\’Ous system and mental peace of its possessor. 

Number six people are said to be quick-witted and when 
reinforced and supported by 5 and 2 intuitive powers are 
indicated. 

People governed by six have a loye of music, singing, danc- 
ing and rhythm. They have also a fine taste for pose and 
symmetry and the mental powers incline a person to fine arts. 



rRACnCAL PALMISTRY 


241 


poetry, painting, etc. According to Cheasley the destiny num- 
ber of six will incline a person to live a purposeful life and 'to 
attempt to adjust all the life-values. I’hat is why number six 
people have been found to be good, loyal and peaceful friends. 
As a matter of fact they are the comforters of the human race. 
Love is their watch-word in life. 

So far as the professions to which such people are inclin- 
ed are concerned, it can be said that tht*y are found at the head 
of institutions and businesses. Nursing, dress-making, house 
keeping, and artistic and musical x>ursuits attract them. 

Women with 6 as their destiny number or included in 
their birth date prove to be excellent house-keepers on account 
of their love of home and house keeping. On the whole six 
has been considered a lucky number of the intellectual trio. 

Indications of Number 9. 

Number nine as stated elsewhere is associated with the 
planet of Mars. On the hand Mars is associat("d with Mars 
positive and Mars negative and the plain of Mars, and the 
student is referred to the relevant chapter. Before the cycle 
of the manifestation of this universe tliere was immensity, Et- 
ernity and Infinity and the Boundless Being, the Universal In- 
telligence, the Nirgtm Brahman alone existed, and when the 
night of Brahma ended and the cky dawned then appeared 
Prajapati or Savitar or Sun-God, represented by number 1, and 
after all the states of evolution appeared tlie crown of creation 
— Man, represented by number nine. He is the centre of ever- 
lasting forces. There is the Divine in him and he is the child 
of God. In the beginning he is animal, then he becomes human 
and finally he becomes divine. The life that started with Sun 
when the spirit descended into matter reached its highest point 
in man represented by nine. After evolution it will again 
return into 1 for after the number nine comes 10 which 
reduc'ed to one digit is 1. In this connection we quote from 
tlie book Mars, the Warlord, of the famous author on astrology 
Alan Leo. He says^ “Man is a part of the Universe, and there- 
fore he has witlu'n himself the same essences as those which 
(*xist in the stars. He is a compound of all the elements; but 
some of these elements preponderate over others at certain 
stages of his evolution. In the early stages of his development, 
the animal is uppermost, and he is only conscious that he is 
attracted by objects outside himselff i'eeling a force; later he 
learns how to control this force and becomes conscious, know- 
ing himself as a separate entity with a force within as well as 
without and finally he becomes superconscious or consciou.s of 
his indissoluble relation to the whole Universe. He thus passes 
from the animal to the human, and finally to^the divine.*^ 

Now we turn to the indications of number nine when it is 
found in the birth date or Us a de.stiny number. It is regarded 
a figure of science, wisdom and the highest expression of im- 



242 


INDIAN PAl^MISTRY 


personal love. As a figure of science it gives practicality, inven- 
tiveness and a scientific tone of mind to its possessor. Hence 
electricians, chemists, inventors, mechanics, nurses, doctors, 
photographers and radio engineers are indicated. Besides lec- 
turers and teachers of science with number nine are successful 
in their profession. 

Wlien nine is found in the date of birth, it is said to 
strengthen other figure in the map, and the fortunate possessor 
is advised to make the best use of it, for unless great and con- 
sistent efforts are made, it is not possible for him to overcome 
difficulties and impediments, for nine people require congenial 
surroundings for carrying on their work. As already stated, it is 
a figure of wisdom. As Dr. Unite Cross says in his book Psy- 
chology of Fate, when the destiny digit of a person is number 
nine (as in the case of Mahatma Gandhi) he seems to have a 
wonderful accumulation of knowledge in his possession. Rein- 
camationists say that “9 people are old souls, and are with us 
in this incarnation for the last time, having completed the 
cycle of earthly learning.” 

Number nine is not considered a benign influenc,*e in life. 
People governed by it have been found to be involved in pur- 
suing impracticable schemes and amliitions in regard to the, 
regeneration of mankind. Sometimes they start humanitarian 
and philanthropic projects which come to nothing. Tfie fact 
of the matter is that when^nine is the fate number the pos- 
sessor thereof cannot get away from influences ‘typifying the 
highest expression of impersonal love.” Highly evolved souls 
follow the path tread by Christ and Buddha. These people 
rely more on their intuitional faculties than on their intellec- 
tual ability. Tliey listen to the inner voice of God and act 
acordingly. It is a fact known to all that the beloved leader and 
saint of India, Mahatma Gandhi, whose fate number is 9, the 
date of birth being 2-10-1869, followed the inner voice and 
bnished aside all other reasonings and considerations. That 
is why he embarked on fasts unto death. Thus number 9 
people througli their sixth sense have direct contact: with the 
Divine Intc'lligencc pervading the vvbole Universe. 

Likely occupations to which number nine people are at- 
tracted are education, authorship, drama, particularly writing of 
tragedies, healing, sculpture, painting, criminal justice, the 
legal profession, position^ of trust and responsibility in which 
freedom of thought and action is allowed to them, pursuits in 
winch a chance is aflorded to them for giving expression to 
their artistic tastes, sympathy, inspiration and emotion. They 
feel liappy when they get a chance of founding institutions 
for the dare of animals and for orphans, affording medical and 
other kinds of relief to the needy and the destitute as also of 
running educational institutions like 'schools, colleges and Uni- 
versities of wliich they desire to be the head. 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


243 


When Mars is unfavourable on the htmd, and associated 
witfi adverse figures in the birth date, it should be regarded as 
tending to bring about disaster. 

So far we have been dealing with figures 3, 6 and 9, re- 
presenting the “mental or intellectual trio.” Now we turn to 
fibres 2, 5, and 8 which ‘relate to the emotional personality 
of man. We may term them the “psychic trio.^' 

Indications of Number 2. 

Number 2 is associated with the planet Moon which exer- 
cises a great influence on our mind. “Number 2,” says Dr. 
Unite Cross, “is the first and foremost embodiment of modera- 
tion. It is the diluent of the wine of life and many a figure 
graph that appears to run riot is restrained by the curbing in- 
fluence of the figure 2.” He further goes on to say tliat “2 res- 
trains the emotions and moderates the affections,” 

Number two people are unstable by nature, and have a 
strain of being pliant and yielding in disposition. They, how- 
ever, possess a faculty of being adaptable. Besides, a doctor 
having 2 and 9 in his date of birth possesses a healing touch, 
and is a first-rate diagnostician. - Although inclined to purity 
of character, people governed by 2 have been found to be 
of an impressionable nature, ana are very greatly influenced 
by their environment. Though det^ply moved by love, number 
two people are undemonstrative. ^ Moreover, they possess a 
facul^ of bringing people together; and in all private, com- 
mercial and industrial enterprises their place is that of those 
who form the basis or foundation of all great undertakings 
and schemes of progress. Wlien number 2 is repeated in the 
date of birth, changeableness in uatiire is indicated; and that 
is why number two people cannot remain in one place for 
long, and cannot stick to one profession. 

In the hand the student should look at the mount of Moon 
which is the mount of imagination. 

When 2 is the destiny digit the watchword of life is ser- 
vice and the path'of life cohesion. As stated above number 
two people are inclined to serve humanity and the faculty 
and aim of cohesion is in evidenc’e in their life when they act 
as go-betweens between person and person and community and 
community. ITie fact of the matter is that a lot of “cohesion in 
society” is due to people governed by**humber 2. 

Let us turn to the professions to which number 2 people 
are attracted. They are drawn to occultism and can become 
spiritualists, mesmerists and hypnotists. The profession of act- 
ing, diplomacy, politics, salesmanship, secretary, solicitor and 
positions where they are caUed upon to bring the mass of 
people in touch with authorities draw them. People of this 
type have been found to^possess smooth and supple fingers, 
the mount of Moon strong and well-developed, the thumb 



244 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


. supple and bending backward, and the lines of Fate and Sun 
rising from the mount of Moon; and that is why such people 
are public favouritCi; and “lubricants of the whole soci^ ma- 
chine.” Besides, number 2 people have a very close affinity witli 
anything wherein liquids i>lay an important part and hence 
doctors who dispense prescriptions ancl medicines become suc- 
cessful in theh'* trade, 

c 

Indications of umber 5. 

Number five has been regarded as a powerful figure. In 
astrology it is associated with Mercury, called the Messenger 
of the Gods. On the hand it is represented by the mount 
situated under the little finger. Without a strong mount of 
Mercury and a straight and well-developed finger of Mercury, 
well-set on the palm and long enough to reach at least the 
terminating point of the first or nail phalange of the third 
finger, it is not possible for a person to achieve success espe- 
ciallv in the material sphere. Mercury^ to be beneficial and 
good must be associated with and influenced by a healthy and 
nonnal development of tiic mounts on the hand just as 
its position in the horoscope, conjunction with and aspects 
from other planets make it adverse or otherwise. In numero- 
logy as well, this number intensifies the indications of other 
figures in the date of birth, t Dr. Cross regards this number as 
“essentially the digit of the soul,” wl».ich he says is the seat of 
emoUons. Number five people are restless and ambitious. They 
have a go-ahead spirit, and are moved by a spirit of adven- 
ture; and their uiidertakings come out successful if other figures 
are found to lie in accord. Besides this number inclines its 
possessor to active work and action, and great people like 
President Abraham Lincoln, Gladstone and Hitler had number 
five as their destiny digit. That is why these great figures of 
history had splendid achievements in the political and social 
spheres to tlieir credit. 

Number five people have hastiness of temper, but are very 
prompt in coming to decisions. Impulsi\.e and restless by 
nature it becomes hard for them (o stick to one place; and 
hence they have been found to be fond of travel. They arc 
great talkers and very much fond of moving in society and are 
the favourites of the oppo.site sex. When five is associated 
and reinforced by 8 a mystical temperament is developed. 
Moreover, being inquisifive by nature, they take to scientific 
studies wherein they make their mark. Number 5 if not found 
in the birth date is a sign that so far as the success in th** mate- 
rial field is concerned, there would not be any kind of very 
unusual success. 

. It has also been seen that number fiv^e people are quick to 
grasp opportunities and turn thcmi^ into stepping stones for 
greater success in spheres wherein they are strong and for 
which they have special aptitudes. When acting under the 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


245 


sway of inspiration and emotion, they have been found to^be 
at their best, but they are apt to overstrain their powers; and 
as a result disasters befall them. Lastly it may be remarked 
that as lawyers, doctors, business men, and in other professional 
walks of life, number five people have met with chances which 
they turn to good account. . Besides as Dr. Cross truly observer, 
“Number five as a destiny figure is a guarantee that in most 
cases the life would be full of change.?, excitement and adven- 
ture. 

Tlie aim of life or, watch word of five people is unity and 
the path of life is governed by the fact that they are moved to 
gaining experience of life. 

Now we turn to the professions or trades to which number 
five people are attracted and they are given below: — 

Surgery, travelling salesmanship, writing of original adver- 
tisements, inventions, journalism, teaching and anything that is 
connected with their love of change, travel, variety and origi- 
nality. Number five people make excellent lawyers, doctors, 
businessmen, scientists and teachers. As secretaries they prove 
their worth and by the force of their go-ahead spirit and men- 
tal elasticity succeed in launching and organizing joint-stock 
companies and trusts. 

Indicatiotis of Number 8. 

Number 8 is associated with »Saturn;‘ and on the hand of 
man its place is under the second finger. It gives wisdom, 
industry, patience and exercises^ a restraining influence on the 
emotions clenoted by the other mounts. The fact of the matter 
is that it is a balance-wheel of the character. TTie line of Fate, 
the road of destiny on which we travel, ends on this mount 
and in palmistry this line is also called the line of Saturn, the 
nature of which indicates human personaL’ty. 

If the number 8 in a birth date is associated with number 
1 and 5 it indicates certainty of progress and utilization of 
chances offered under the influence of number five. Besides, if 
reinforced by other favourable numbers, i.e., 6, 2 and 3, there 
is a certainty of achievement of ambitions, and the life would 
be full of events and changes. 

If tlie destiny digit is 8, the purpose of life is most likely 
to be perfection in the material sphere, and the watchword 
will be service, and hence the person, is* likely to foDow a varied 
path of life. 

Number 8 giv^ intuitional powers, and these people are 
also endowed with strange sort of psychic or occult experiences. 
If found in a birtli date a faculty for dreaming curious dreams 
and having premonitions is denoted, and sometimes such peo- 

g le see events coming. Besides, number 8 people are governed 
y deeply philosophical ideas, and if associated and dominated 
by Moon and Jupiter they retire from the world, and get out 



246 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


. of Jtoucb with it. 0n the other hand if 8 is repeated, and the 
hand bears unbalanced marks and signs, such people feel out 
of sympathy with the world, and we can call them misanthro- 
pic. The excess of 8 in the birth date gives a sort of what we 
can term mental indigestion. 

• The negadve aspect of 8 relates to instability and lack of 
concentration, gloom, and misanthropic tendencies. Obstacles, 
impediments, loss, hurt, privations and other unforeseen misfor- 
tunes pursue number 8 people. 

When Saliirn, i.e., 8 is favourable in the horoscope and 
birth date, it is a mark that the ambitions and desires of life 
would be fulfilled. It has also been seen that persons ruled 
by 8 try to live more for others than for themselves, because 
they feel and rightly feel that happiness does not come to us 
through selfishness. 

Professions and trades to which they are attracted are those 
wherein they have a chance of direction and control of material 
expression and a freedom (^f thought and action. They desire 
lo Ijc placed at tlie head of corporations, companies and large 
undertakings and tnists. They also turn to agriculture, mining 
and all that relates to earth. AstrologicaUy speaking our planet 
earth is ruled by Saturii. Number 8 people make excellent* 
judges because of their intvitional powers and seriousness of 
leinpemment. It also makes one a good linguist. 

The Material Trio, 

ITe Material figures are 1^ 4 and 7, and thev have been 
fcrmetl money magnets. 

Indications of Number 1. 

Number one stands for Sun the Savitar of the Vedas\ the 
Snn-Ood who is the life-giver onr planet earth. Without the 
life-giving light and heat of the Sun, life on our planet is un- 
thinkable. On the hand the mount of Sun is situated under 
the third finger between the line of Heart and the base of the 
finger. It is a mcnint wliich governs the Ihie of Sun or siic- 
cesss or knf)wledge or Vidyas as tlie Hindus call it. Without this 
line, tlie life is obscure and unhappy. The mount of Sun if 
normally developed on tiie hand is the indication of a sunny 
disposition and personal magnetism so very necessary for hap- 
piness and siK'cess in life. The strength of the Sun mount on 
tlic hand is indicative of energy and force of will and character 
present in a person. The finger of Sun fs regarded by die 
Hindus as sacred, and it is witli this finger that the priest makes 
the mark of Swastika or Om on anything he wishes to make 
sacred. . 

Now we turn to the indications of number one in the birth 
date and as destiny digit. According to Dr. Cross, number 
one represents ‘ a surge of influence that is material and con- 



FRACnCAL PALMISTRY 


247 


Crete. It is indeed the figure of the cienonlinator, the I am., the' 
ego, the capital 1." If not repeated in excess in the birth date 
and the Sun mount is normally developed in the hand, man 
achieves a high measure of success through power, determina- 
tion of character, persistence in the pursuit of an aim anti above 
ail ambition. All these quahties have a magnificent expression, 
if Mercury denoted by 5 and Jupiter denoted by 3 are also in 
favour, "rhat is why for number on6 people to be successful 
in tlie right direction, the healthy influence of the spiritual in- 
tellectual figures of 3, 6 and 9 is very necessary. On the other 
hand, it has also been seen that if in the birth date an intellec- 
tual figure is absent and 5 and 8 are present, because of the 
''surge of emotions” the person might be carried away and led 
astray. 

Number one people ate generally successful because of 
their being self-reliant and determined to sucH a degree that 
they would not allow themselves to be deflected from their 
path and purpose in life. 

Number one people have ^^Iso been found to be ready to 
grasp any opportunity that comes to them. Besides, they are 
also born fighters, and because of their natural vitality possess 
powers to return to normal health after long and exhausting 
illnes.ses. , 

Tlicre is a negative side to this all powerful number. If 
overdeveloped on the hand and repeated more than twice, sun 
makes a person showy and mean and sometimes gruff in man- 
ner and sjieech, and a woman petty minded and too masculine 
to be at all desirable. Besides, a man is made pitiless’ when 
dealing with his enemies. Number one makes strong characters 
and they create more enemies than friends and become un- 
popular. Besides they dislike subordination, and hence feel 
more at home when afforded a chance to feel independent. 

Number one people are drawn to business, stock and share- 
broking, departmental managership, military service, and artis- 
tic and public pursuits in which a chance to make money is 
afforded. 


Indications of Number 4. 

Number four is associated with Uranus, a planet unknown 
to the ancients. Its location on the .hand has not been indi- 
cated by any writer although receiity one Mr. Deva-Charya 
has tried to find a place for it, as also for Neptune. I am 
however inclined to associate it with Sun, and Cheiro, the cele- 
brated British Author, places it by the side of Sun and thinks 
that this numbei has a deep relation with figure one. Sepharial 
also calls it the negative Sun. This view ,seems to me to . be 
correct since I found that when four appeared in the birth date 
even if one was absent, the Sun mount and finger were strong 
and had llieir favourable influence on the destiny. 



248 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


,Dr. Unite Cross •calls it "a true lucky number and specially 
desired by the average person for success in life, since it de- 
notes critical insight and ability to drive a good bargain.” Peo- 
ple with four as destiny digit or in the birth date hav^ a desire 
to enjoy the good things of life. They have faith in peace and 
contentment. Further on. Dr. Cross goes on to say, ‘'Around 
a four personality, friends of both sexes gather as it is so easy to 
get along with them. Tliey are always a shelter in the storm 
and stress of life, and in the street of adversity they are as 
welcome as a big policeman. One can^ always lean on a four 
person.'* 

Four people have been said to be lucky and in speculative 
enterprises they win a lot. 

If four is associated with numbers 5, 8 and 1 success 
in life should be considered as assured. From a financial stand- 
point, four is a lucky digit to have. Besides, it is belie\’ed that 
four is favourable on the material plane, while 7 is not. 

When the destiny digit is four, the purpose of life is said 
to be material production and the watchword service. Number 
four people easily become engineers, teachers, mechanics, che- 
mists, electricians architects atid businessmen. They will also 
easily fill those positions wherein they would be required to. 
make use of energy, intellecf and physical endurance. 

Indications of Number 7. 

The third number of the material trio is 7, associated wuth 
the planet Neptune. It has close connection with the planet 
Moon, and Sepharial calls it the Positive* Moon. On the hand 
1 would assign it a place along with Moon. In numerology it is 
considered in point of energ>^ and strength second only to num- 
ber one, but like the Moon its vibrations are mutable. This 
number intensifies the indications afforded by other numbers 
in a birth date. Thus for example if 2, 5, 8 have a dominating 
influence, the number seven if present would accentuate the 
emotional plane of life, and if material, the material, if mental, 
the mental values would have a greater manifestation of their 
indications. 

If 7 is the destiny digit, it does not make for happiness in 
life, since it gives restlessness to the nature, and endows us with 
a nature which creates misunderstandings for nothing. 

It has also been foi$n^ that people with 7 in their birth 
date associated with other powerful numbers like 5, 1 and 9 
become leaders and initiators of world reforms. The great 
Theosophical leader Dr. Annie Besant had 7 in her birth date 
associated with 1, 4 and 0, her date of birth being 1-10-1847. 

When seven is the number associated with the date of birth 
or* name of a persbn, I always found him or her moved by a 
feeling of civic righteousness. 

So far as business is concerned, number 7 people possess 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


249 


organizing capacity, and as such the line of »Head on their hand , 
has been found to Be straight as in the case of Dr. Besant. But 
experience tells us that they have no patience with handling of 
details in the financial sphere. 

It is also believed tliat the first years of these people are 
the worst but as the 35th year is oassed. affairs begin to 
improve. 

People governed by seven are hasty in temper and rebel- 
lious by nature, But they are born fighters, and if supported 
by numbers 1 and 9, they would fight to the last witn their 
backs to the wall. 

Number 7 people have for their purpose of life subjective 
development and peace, and that is why although a material 
number it indicates loss and sacrifice in the material sense and 
refines and ennobles the life and character of people who come 
under its influence. 'It is, therefore,” says Dr. Cross, "that 
there are no greater persons than the awakened soul of the 
seven class.” 

If associated with 1, 7 makes its possessor stubborn and 
aggressive, but these qualities are used by him or her not for 
the sake of personal advancement, but for the purpose of pre- 
• Venting injustice being done to their fellow beings. 

In short, 7 people have the qualities of breadth of mind 
and view, and are moved by an ij^rge to acquire and store vast 
knowledge from all quarters. Their mind is an encyclopaedia 
of knowledge, but it is a pity that they are not physically robust 
and strong, • 

Professions to which 7 people are attracted are those of 
novelists, churchmen, horticulturists, mining engineers and 
positions which aie responsible in authority and do not require 
menial and manual labour. They feel at home and at ease 
when placed at the head. 

UOW TO READ FIGURES IN A BIRTH DATE 

We have dealt with indications of the nine numbers found 
in a birth date. Now we turn to the method of reading a 
figure-graph. The student should first of all find out the highest 
total out of the three trios dealt with. He should also judge 
the strength and indications of the figures bearing on the char- 
acter of the person. IT this is judged jaright, it will be possible 
to say something about the destiny,* for character is destiny. 
The student, as stated elsewhere, should note the occurrence 
of zero in the birth date. 

For the edification of the student we take the following 
tases : — 

Poet Rabindranath Tagore. 

1. 7-5-1861. Fate Number 1. 

2. Swami Vivekananda, the celebrated saint, reformer 



250 


INDIAN PALMISTRY 


and disciple of Sri Ramakrishna Paramhansa of Bengal. 
12-1-1863. Fate Number 4. 

3. Mahatma Gandhi, the father of the Indian nation. 
2-10-1869. Fate Number 9. 

4. Ex-King Edward VIII, now the Duke of Windsor. 
23-6-1894. Fate Number 6. 

5. A member of the Punjab Judicial Service whose im- 

E rint is included in the book. 

4-7-1901. Fate Number 0. 

6 Herr Adolf Hitler, the Dictator of Germany. 
20-4-1889. Fate Number 5. 

7. Djivid Lloyd George, Ex-Prime Minister of England. 
17-1-1863. Fate Number 9. 

Case No. 1. Dr. Rabindranath Tagore was bom on 
7-5-1861. The figure in this birth date are: — 

1. Mental plane ... 6 

2. Emotional plane ... ... ... 5 

3. Material plane ... ... 1 and 7 

The destiny number is one thus adding to the strength of 
the material fi^ires. All the three planes are represented in 
the birth date, and it is therefore concluded that the nature 
of the Poet was balanced. ^In the mental plane is the 6 indi- 
cating musical ability of the^ Poet which was unsurpassed, and 
this. number strengthened by the three strongest numbers, i.e., 
I, 5 and 7, indicates an amazing personality that commanded 
respect and homage all over the world., Besides these figures 
taken* together, and when reinforced by the fact of his having 
number one as his fate number, they make the greatest poet 
of India since Kalidas. 

Number one refers to Sun and its strength in the birth date 
shows that it would be equally strong on the hand. The finger, 
mount and line of Sun on tne hand are remarkable for their 
excellence and that is why the Poet earned immortal name and 
fame. Number five refers to the mount of Mercury which was 
uncommonly strong on the hand. The finger was straight, in- 
dicative of literary ability of a very high order. This mount 
and finger were tiiat of a philosopher, and a poet-philosopher 
Dr. Tagore actually was. Number 7 is present in the day of 
the birth date. As stated^ elsewhere, there are no greater people 
than the awakened soul ‘of number 7. Such a one was Poet 
Tagore, who had the mount of Moon excellently developed on 
his hand with a creative curve, fish, canopy, temple and trident 
on his hand. These marks were present on the soles of the feet, 
of Sri Krishna. 

• Case No. 2. Swami ^'^ivekanand was bom on 12-1-1863. 
The destiny number is 4. These are the figures in the birth 
date. 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


251 


Mental plane ' t . . . 3 and 6 

Emotional 2 

Material 1 

Twice repeated is ticked and the ruling fate number is 4. 
In the figure-graph of the celebrated Swami the spiritual 
numbers of 3 and 6 are strengthened by double Sun and Uranus. 
The presence of 2 in the birthday figure gives a* softer tone to 
the nature. The presence of four as*the destiny number in- 
clined the Swami towards peace, especially when the spiritual 
figures held the field. JSIumber 3 associated with 6 and rein- 
forced by one repeated twice, combined to make the Swami 
an intellectual giant, a yogi and a writer and speaker of un- 
usual fire, force and clarity of expression. On his hand the 
student would havd found a trdent on Jupiter and a mark of 
Sanyas on the same place, and this refers to figures 3 and G. 
Besides, his line .of Head was beautifully marked, and tlie un- 
commonly marked line of Sun is indicated by one repeated 
twice. This was tlic sign of his fame everlasting. The mark 
of fish on the hand was the result of the presence of three 
on the figure-graph. Tlie destiny digit being tour indicated 
that the Swami would be a tower of strength to the people ot 
^*the world. In fact the Swami was an apt pupil of his master 
* Sri Ramakrishna, and renounced the world for the sake of sin- 
ning and troubled humanity. 

Case No. 3. Mahatma Gandhi was bom on the 2-10-1869. 
Figures in the birth date arc: — 

1. Spiritual and mental^ 6 and 9 

2. Emotional • * ..2 

3. Material 1 

4. Destiny digit 9 

Nought strengthens every digit in the birth date. 

If read aright tlie Mahatma w^as ruled by spiritual and 
mental figures strengthened by the energy and powerful digit 
of number one but moderated by the number 2 which is me 
first and foremost embodiment of moderation. The Mahatma 
being ruled by the day figure of number 2 and spiritual figure 
of nine, trusted his intuitive power and inner voice of Good. 
The repetition of number nine indicates that the Mahatma will 
typify the highest expression of impersonal love, and as already 
stated will complete the cycle of earthly learning and attain 
moksha like the famous Janaka of.amcient India. Numbers 2, 
9, 6 and 1 in his birth date gave him a strength of will to 
achieve his purpose. His last fast begun on the 13-1-1948, for 
the sake of ending communal bitterness and hate prevailing 
in the dominions of India and Pakistan ended in the victory 
of his cause, since the day on which he started it was ruled 
by his own fate number nine. The studeift is advised to note 
how it is calculated. i* 

1-3-1-1-9-4-8=27=9. 



252 


INDIAN PAUillSTRY 


Tlie fame everlasting which is his already will be all tli 
grbater, and the future generations will remember him as the 
do Christ and Buddha. 

Case No. 4. Ex-King Edward VIII, now the Duke of 
Windsor, was born on the 23-6-1894. The destiny digit of the 
Duke is 6. The figures in the birth date are: — 

Mental 3, 6, 9. 

Emotional * ... ... ... ... 2. 

Material ... ... ... ... 4. 

The famous Duke has an unusual mental triangle. With 
these figures, an amazing personality is produced. His ruling pla- 
net is six which refers to Venus. Numbers nine, three and six, 
reinforced by emotional two, endowed him with a strength of 
will and a capacity to love that led him to take a step which 
showed th^t the Duke was not moved at all by material values 
of life. Otherwise it was unthinkable how the King of an Em- 
pire over w4iich the Sun never sets would give up his throne 
for tlie sake of a woman whom he loved and to whom he 
wanted to be faithful. On his hand the planets Jupiter, Mars, 
Venus and Moon must be strong. If the figures of the year 
1938, when he abdicated his throne, be added the result is 3, 
and six lacing related to three indicates that the year 1938 
would be memorable in his career. 

Case No. 5. The Judge? whose date of birth is 24-7-1901 
has a well-marked hand, the- reading of which has been given 
in Chapter XXI of the book. 

The figures are: — 

1. Mental none. 

2. Emotional ... ... 2. 

3- Material ... 4, 7, 1. 

Zero is present to stren^hen the birth date. The fate 
number is six if the century figures are added, otliciwise it is 
five. The lines on the hand accord with the figures of the birth 
date. The attention of the student is drawn to the strong line 
of Fate, straight line of Head, well-shaped fingers and a strong 
thumb. The judge possesses qualities that f^o to make a good 
judicial officer. In character he possesses all the qualities de- 
noted by the figures found in the birth date. His genial and 
affectionate disposition, sunny temperament, self-sacrificing tone 
of mind, breadth of vision and love of studies and desire to 
accumulate vast knowledge, and a sense of civic righteousness 
are denoted by the figures in the birth date. 

Case No. 6. Herr Adolf Hitler, the famous dictator of 
Germany, w'as born on 20-4-1889. If the figures of the date 
of birth are added, tlie destiny digit comes to 5. Tlie day on 
which he began the War was governed by number five. Tlie 
result was that thi^ date vibrated well with his destiny num- 
ber and hence his success in the Wai was marvellous. Let us 
analyse the figures in the birth date: 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


253 


1. Mental plane ... ... 9. 

2. Emotional 2, 8, 

3. Material 4. 

The ruling digit is five. Thus in the figure-graph the a."so- 
ciation of the powerful five with number nine and progres- 
sive 8 and 4 combined to "give Hitler the power he wielded 
over the youths and people of Germany. • The figures on the 
emotional plane dominated the dictaft)r, and that is why he 
failed to calculate correctly, and lost the War. The figure nine 
reinforct'd by 5 and 8, ^ind still further strcMigthcned by zero 
urged iu'm to do things in the War that made him in his life 
tiinc the most talked-of person in the whole world, and I do not 
know or any figure in histor>', ancient or modern, whr> in his 
life time had ('arned so much celebrity. No other military 
leader in the world so far could surpass his fame. 

Case No. 7. David Lloyd George, the Ex-Prime Minister 
of England, was bom on 17-1-1863. Analysed, his figures are : — 

Mental ... ... ... ... 3, 6. 

Emotional ... ... none. 

Material 1, 7. 

The ruling planet is nine. Lloyd George had 3, 6 on the 
mental x3lane and these were strengthened by the powerful 
numbers nine, one and seven. In the make up of the Ex-Prime 
!fcinister, as a result of the presQpce of .these numbers, were 
found moral force and courage, contempt of danger and a 
decisive character, which made short shrift of obstacles. 

It is a historical fact that*Lloyd George possessed .those 
moral and mental qualities that brought him from obscurity into 
the limelight, and enabled him to embark on a war against 
political tyranny and feiidahsm under the in.spiring number nine 
and aggressive 1 and powerful 7 and intellectual 3. Lloyd 
George seized the reins of Government into his own powerful 
hands in 1916 and it was he who in World War 1 saved Eng- 
land from a shuddering disgrace. The years 1909, 1917 and 
1918 were rnemorapble in the career of the Prime Minister. In 
the years 1909 which if totalled comes to one, 1917 which is 
reducfxl to 9, and 1918 to 1, Lloyd George achieved much. His 
budget of 1909 led to the general election of 1910 and in 1917 
he wa<jed war successfully, emerged victorious in 1918 and 
proceeded to the x^eace conference. ^TJms number 1 in 1909 and 
1918 and number nine in 1917, which vibrated favourably with 
the date of his birth, played their part and made the years of 
his life memorable. 

Now we turn to another method of divination by numbers 
known to ancients as the famous pyramid of fortuhe. We 
explain the method thus: — 

Take the date of birth of a person, say Hitler 20-’4-1889. 
The ruling planet as already explained is the figure 5. We 



254 


INDIAN JPALMISinY 


want to find out ^ the kind of fortune that would befall him 
when he entered the age of 51. 

Put 5, 1 and the destiny digit as : — 

5 15 

add the first and second figures beginning from the left hand 
side and when they amount to more than nine, reject nine and 
put down the remainder, thus we get the second line: 

5 15 

6 6 

now add the two and the result is as:^ — 

5 15 

6 6 
3 

The year of the dictator was ruled by the number 3 at 
the head of the pyramid as the index or apex number, -and we 
shall give later on the values and indications derived from the 
headstone or apex number of the pyramid which is shown 
for the sake of convenience upside down. The years 
which were mlcd were 1939 and 1940. The indications 
of apex number three are success and gain with increase and 
expansion, great hopes realized and efforts rewarded. It is a 
historical fact that Hitler achieved wonderful success in the 
beginning of tlie War. Curiously enough, the year 1940 (add 
the figures) was ruled by his ruling and destiny digit, i.e. 5, and 
that is why he achieved extraordinary success. 

Let us take the next year of his age and calculate: — 

5 2 5 

7 7 

5 

The 52nd year was ruled by 5, his own destiny number. 
In this year also success alU-aJed liis effoits in the War. 

Let us take the 54th year of his life. 

5 4 5 

9 9 

9 

The number at the apex is 9. Tliere was success, but it 
was after hard fights and contests. The next year calculated 
thus. 

5 5 5 

1 1 
2 

This was the year 1944 when Hitler began to lo.se. The 
index number is 2 and the value thereof is failure. 

Let tis take another example. 

‘ Date of birth. 29-6-1920. The destiny digit is 2, but in 
the 20th Century 1 is dropped and the destiny number should 
be calculated as: — 



PRACTICAL PALMISTRY 


255 


29-6-20 i.e., 19=1.* 

Let us know how the year 27 of this date of birth passed.* 
2 7 1 

9 8 

8 

The headstone or capital or number at tjie apex is 8. This 
*s the number ot Saturn, and points to failure through jealousy 
4 nd also shows loss, obstacles and hindrances. In the life of 
this young man, whose date of birth has been given above, the 
27th yea was a dead year, when he was forced by jealous 
people t(^ take decision to resign the small job he held. There 
were obstacles in his path. He was also transferred to an 
out-of-tfe way Station on account of the complaints of his 
enemies but as soon as the 27th year was passed and he en- 
ered tie 28th vear, affairs began to improve. Let us see. 

. 2 8 1 
1 9 

1 

^yriie apex number is one, showing success through the 
patronage of people in authorit>'. It is a fact that in this year 
' e^rereived appreciation for the work done by him and received 
'^ornotion to a higher grade. Thus the student can make use 
th/? birth date for divining the fortune. But he must verii^ 
Ais (onclusions by referring to the indications of the hand. 
That is how palmistry and numerorogy can be used to read 
rhe life and destiny of a jjcrson. 

We now give belo\^ the values assigned to each of the 
rn.ie numbers when they apnear as apex to the pyramid of for- 
^ .!€, and the student should make an intelligent use of it in 
•ivjiig at conclusions regarding the year for which calculation 
made. 


Nvrnher One. Is the number of Sun. It indicates suc- 
achievement, honours, good health and patronage of per- 
is in authority. If it is the final number, it is good and 
/p|irable. 

'^Number 7 too: Indicates failure through vadllation and 
ertainty. It also denotes lack of will power, and women 
. rcise a bad and unfortunate influence. It also indicates un- 
o » mate journeys, decrease, ineffectual efforts, changes and 
r "Rubles consequent on public disordojijg }nd infectious diseases. 
(ITe number refers to the negative Mron. 

f Number Three: Tlefers to Jupiter and indicates increase, 
jxpansion, hopefulness, confidence, cheerfulness, wealth, suc- 
fess, productiveness of efforts and realization of hopes and suo> 
of efforts. 


Number Four: Refers; to Uranus or negative Sun, The' 
ccess attained is only partial due to lack of power of direc- 
yjn. A person does not obtain the satisfaction of his desires. 



256 


nmiAK PA&MisraT 


If position is at. all gained^ there is a loss of dignity and i|..»e 
‘'pendence. Vanity is also indicated. Besides it generally, ie 
notes failure of efForts on account of obstacles, jealousies^ inc 
opx>ositions. If success is at all attained, it is not wortnthc 
name. ^ 


Number Five: This number indicates Mercury and j^a* 
through the use of) the faculties, success through corresponded 
or travelling, it also shows that power would be gained I 
person through knowledge. This also shows that gain wc 
come to a person through commercial instincts, clever manipu-' 
lation of details and also scientific pursuits. 

Number Six: Refers to success through social and artis 
tic pursuits like music, poetry, painting and drawing, etc. N|im- 
ber six refers to Venus and shows that favours and benefi^ 
may come to us from young woman and a happy result or 
eflorts. 

o 

Number Seven: Refers to positive Moon and Neptie 
This number refers to success through the good offices or rn 
rons or married women of position and influence. A p^-s 
comes to public honours, and success comes to him thros 
travelling and commerce. Success is likely to be achieve 
through the forceful, strong and magnetic personalit/ oC 
person. Besides, a person achieves success through traverfn 
publicity, management of people, public works and contrBf 
public supplies. Fortune .comes to a person through the fa 
suit of popular plans and aims. . 

Number Eight: Refers to Saturn, and if this is the nn 
or apex number, obstacles, hindrances,* privations, loss, hurt, d 
fects and impediments, gloom and melanchiillilicss are show 
and a person is likely to come to grief especially in regard 
the marriage partner. Besides, failure through, jealousy, m 
tnist or lack of eftort is denoted. 


Number Nine: This refers to planet Mars. If this is 
final number, success comes to a person thMkigh effo'^ and 
terprise. In spite of rivalries and contests, his object wf*’ 
gained by force of will power. ^ 

this small chapter on numerology as connected 1 
palmistry we have thrown some light on a subject which f 
vast as astrology and hand-reading themselves. The studei i 
advised to make use of this knowledge, and make a de* ^ 
study of the science of .lumbers which is as true as the 
sciences of palmistry and astrology. 
